 get a daily roundup of the top reads in personal finance delivered to your inbox . subscribe to marketwatch free personal finance daily newsletter . sign up here. at times the length of california golden gate bridge the six lane crossing will link a regional economic zone of million people with a combined annual gdp of . trillion almost twice that of the san francisco bay area and larger than the national economies of australia spain or mexico . the nine year construction project joins a recently launched high speed train to cut travel times and boost business ties between mainland chinese manufacturing cities and the financial hub of hong kong as well as the gambling enclave of macau. read italy be the no . risk factor in the fourth quarter for european investments m co.mmm . stock dropped . after the company third quarter profit and revenue missed and it issued downbeat guidance . together m co . and caterpillar combined to account for nearly half the dow loss at tuesday open if a postal error occurred e.g . the distribution or deposit was lost in the mail a taxpayer can be issued a waiver . for example if the distribution check was misaddressed you could receive a waiver. shares in whitbread fell . in london on tuesday after the deal was announced and as the company reported its quarterly results. heart patients should move around every minutes during an eight hour period of sitting according to a paper presented on saturday at the canadian cardiovascular congress in toronto an event where visiting experts from the european society of cardiology participate in joint scientific sessions with the canadian cardiovascular society. jc o’hara chief market technician at mkm partners believes the bulk of the selling be now in the rearview mirror. the realclearpolitics average of polls however shows cruz with a point lead. if a financial institution commits an error either making the rollover distribution or receiving the rollover contribution a self certification waiver be feasible . for example in one instance a taxpayer asked a brokerage house to calculate and distribute the money from his ira to comply with the required minimum distribution rmd rules . they then overestimated the amount to be distributed and sent the taxpayer a check for an amount larger than the required rmd . the mistake was discovered several months later while paying taxes and the taxpayer was able to correct the error at that time. also see your financial adviser sleep easy portfolio may be riskier than you think the short seller had long held that by the time of the model arrival multiple mile range electric vehicles would have been on the market it said tuesday. also read will my brother debt to our mother die with her in this case the uncashed check was strong evidence that the taxpayer was unaware that a rollover was needed . however an uncashed check by itself be not always granted a waiver . for example one taxpayer took money out of his ira account to purchase an ira annuity . after learning the fees associated with the product the taxpayer decided not to purchase the annuity and was sent a check from the company who had originally sold him his new ira . the taxpayer then tried to rollover the amount into a new ira a year later assuming the day window would not apply because he never cashed the check. but he and other observers be aware it not a lack of economic justification that often holds back the adoption of new business models it entrenched interests . in the case of the housing market that realtors. would you like to sign up to an email alert when a new moneyist column has been published if so click on this link. u.s . stocks on tuesday finished in negative territory albeit off the worst levels of the session as worries about global economic growth and downbeat earnings outlooks from blue chip companies sank equities following a rout in china stock market . the dow jones industrial average closed down . points or . at . but had been down by as many as points at its low of the session . the s p index spx . lost . at . led by losses in energy stocks xle . and industrials . meanwhile the nasdaq composite index comp . ended the day down . at . but enjoyed a brief stint in positive territory in a frightful and volatile day for u.s . stocks . notably in corporate news shares of caterpillar inc . cat . closed off . leading dow decliners after the industrial giant reported profits and revenue ahead of analysts expectations but offered guidance that was below consensus . another dow component m co . stock mmm . finished off . after issuing downbeat guidance . m and caterpillar combined to account for nearly half the dow loss at tuesday open at one point during the session . on big bright spot shares of mcdonald corp jumped . for its best day in about three years after its quarterly results on tuesday . markets headed lower out of the gate following the shanghai composite index shcomp . . loss giving back part of a two day rally and reigniting fears of a slowdown in the second largest economy which rippled through markets . still some investors describe tuesday trade action as orderly and constructive despite the negative finish for stocks. it be important to understand the most important concept marijuana stocks move based on what happens at the margin . at the margin there be two kinds of players smart money and momo . the chart above separately shows momo money flows and smart money flows . we have been sharing with you for a while that the smart money has been selling marijuana stocks into the strength . we also gave a signal to sell trade around positions in marijuana stocks at the top. xi plan to build out china silicon valley will need more than infrastructure to succeed . hong kong and macau be both former western colonies promised a high degree of autonomy until the middle of this century they have their own legal and political systems and residents be afforded greater freedoms than their mainland counterparts . in hong kong especially concerns be rising that those rights be being eroded and that beijing ultimate aim be to swallow up the city into the mainland. until recently buying by the momo crowd was much stronger than selling by the smart money . in a prior morning capsule we said a big difference from the past be that the momo crowd be not aggressively buying marijuana stocks. read marketwatch interview with vicki robin however after i reworked the question i was able to ask him if he thought this was a good time for me to take on more risk generally . his answer he thought not . but it was apparently more about me than about wall street. and finally parets took a look at what dow theory be telling us. like i said lots of angles and i skipped several more that might impact the decision. in march it predicted the stock would fall to by year end . citron andrew left be also among the several investors and short sellers who have filed class action lawsuits against tesla for alleged securities law violations stemming from chief executive elon musk going private tweets in august. a close above will nullify the bear case he said . if this pattern indeed plays out for the bears be the downside objective . often capitulation lows be retested . the longer the market trades under the more likely it be to retest . the moneyist facebook group link below had a lot to say . what struck me was how many people agreed with each other on the broader message even if they differed on the details invest the money they said do not fritter it away on private education now especially if you can send your daughter to a good public school . seek the help of a financial adviser . do not make risky investments . save it for college . allow her to make her own decisions when she turns . rumors of the tesla killers have been as constant and unfounded as bob lutz call for tesla bankruptcy citron said taking a jab at the former general motors co . gm .  executive and frequent tesla critic. in a note to clients earlier this month terry added while we clearly have been wrong on snap ability to execute we continue to believe that a twitter like turnaround be possible. when i interviewed women for  nevertheless she persisted it was both eye opening and a relief to hear them share their experiences of being dogged by this same descriptor. osteoarthritis a chronic joint condition that often occurs in older individuals affects more than million u.s . adults according to the centers for disease control and prevention . tanezumab be also in phase trials for two other kinds of common pain chronic low back and cancer pain. several studies indicate women be far more likely to be judged on their performance in ways that do not specifically clarify the level of performance or include focused explanations of what can be improved . being told in a performance review that one be aggressive and being advised to be less aggressive be an example of how women performance reviews can exhibit patterns of bias vague feedback and nonactionable suggestions for improvement. in may the year old who trains and temporarily resides in michigan petitioned to be deemed an alien with extraordinary ability under the immigration code . gaining such status under the eb visa would allow for carreira to seek legal permanent residency status in a matter of months . the eventual goal be citizenship which would allow her to compete under the american flag in olympic games her lawyers noted. at the arora report we address marijuana every day before the market opens in the morning capsule . from the morning capsule we have been sharing with you that marijuana stocks be high beta stocks . in plain english this means that they move a lot . the momo momentum crowd be aggressively selling marijuana stocks . overall smart money flows be negative but on down spikes there be light buying from smart money in select marijuana stocks. those who have the responsibility for reviewing another person performance must choose their words carefully . there be a world of difference between being aggressive and being professionally assertive. get a daily roundup of the top reads in personal finance delivered to your inbox . subscribe to marketwatch free personal finance daily newsletter . sign up here. a self certification waiver based on a misclassified account be most likely to be granted when there be evidence showing that you believed the account was qualified but in reality it was an unsuitable non ira account . proof can be established in a couple of different ways first via documents e.g . an email stating that a person thought the funds were going to a qualified plan or ira and second behavior signifying they believed they had properly completed the rollover. let look at the definition of the word aggressive. merriam webster dictionary defines it as a forceful action or procedure such as an unprovoked attack especially when intended to dominate or master. and further as the practice of making attacks or encroachments. when stocks fall staples get a sympathy bid and outperform due to that very same lower beta and their defensive qualities parets said . with new highs in stocks bulls want to see new lows in relative strength for staples . that a normal environment . it when they diverge that it be evidence of something changing. the results suggest potential for a new alternative to addictive opioids an option that be lacking even many years into america devastating opioid addiction crisis. i am in my s and i plan to work more years . but i also want to find out what this man was thinking . the corporate bonds make up about of this portfolio . he also put her in funds with a front end load something i know my father would never have approved of kept her cash in low paying money market funds and added unit investment trusts. people do not have to follow my path of service spirituality and social innovation . there be so many ways to use your time for happiness meaning purpose and contribution . at the end of the day we all want to have a well lived life . five houses and five cars and a private island without a higher purpose mean nothing. chinese stocks felt some heat from forced selling in june after a tightening of monetary conditions . overall the small capitalization shenzhen composite index . has declined by from its late january high while the shanghai composite index shcomp .  is down from its january peak . both benchmarks be in bear market territory often defined as a drop of at least from a recent peak. also read trump trade fights and a hard brexit could take tariffs to levels not seen in years. breaking that late tuesday trend was teradyne inc . ter . which makes testing equipment for electronics manufacturers . shares rose after hours as both the company quarterly results and outlook exceeded street expectations. the legal victory centers on the use of the company name or likeness purportedly to promote the foundation similarly named virtual currency according to oct . court documents in the u.s . southern district of new york. we saw these divergences lead to collapses in and more recently a severe selloff in parets wrote . you can see that with new highs in the dow this month transports put in a lower high typical behavior at market tops. even if medicare for all made no changes to medicare operations it still would have the problem of taking a program that functions well for about a sixth of the population and trying to make it work on a vastly larger scale the white house official said. over any year period they found that halloween investor had a chance of beating a buy and hold investor with far higher returns. next came bridgeport stamford norwalk conn . where the average income from dividends and qualified dividends were and respectively. also see america be house rich but cash poor and these businesses see opportunity if you be seriously ill a waiver could be granted . for example if dementia directly affected the ability to complete a timely rollover a self certified waiver be likely . in addition hospitalization may be a valid reason to extend the day period through self certification. please click here for the updated chart showing money flows in marijuana stocks. in media coverage late monday and through the day tuesday political commentators wrestled with whether trump fully understood the term in its dark historical contexts racism and even nazism among them or alternatively meant only to characterize himself as a patriot under a different label . was he chiefly trolling his critics and the notion of political correctness was he merely seeking to amuse an audience likely to delight in transgressive speech verizon communications inc . vz .  shares gained . after the communications giant beat analysts earnings and sales forecasts. centene corp . cnc . slid . after the company lowered the high end of its profit guidance. tilray be the poster boy of short squeeze stock candidates here how to find others the house bill moreover would prevent healthcare providers from earning profits the white house official said. one factor that made that plunge worse analysts recall was forced selling by traders who loaded up on leverage pushing margin debt to a record ahead of the crash . this time around the concern centers on companies and shareholders that have pledged stock as collateral for loans . as in that runs the risk of kicking off a vicious cycle in which falling stock prices leads to forced selling as pledged shares be liquidated in turn leading to further falls in stock prices. of course the residents of these cities who be raking in the mailbox money be doing much better than many americans . despite a seemingly strong economy nearly of adults say their families have had trouble meeting at least one basic need for food health care housing or utilities in the last year according to a report by the urban institute a nonpartisan nonprofit policy group based in washington d.c. the shanghai composite index shcomp .  gave back part of a two day rally falling . on tuesday. please also read jab the investment company which manages the fortune of germany reimann family has spent billions to acquire coffee brands around the world including keurig green mountain kdp .   which merged with dr pepper snapple group earlier this year and peet coffee tea . in june jab shelled out £ . billion for british food chain pret a manger. gerald wolanin a cpa in willoughby hills ohio has one solution sell the property under irs code section tax free exchange requirements and invest the proceeds in a real estate investment trust that accepts irs code section funds . that will defer federal capital gain taxes due on the sale of the property continue to receive monthly quarterly income and eliminate any requirement to manage the property he said. it not just the left . a poll conducted by hill.tv and the harrisx polling company found that of republicans surveyed said they supported medicare for all which would put in place a single payer health care system. tariff defense a couple of things spring to mind that would make rolling to an ira less attractive . one would be if you were planning to separate from service at your current employer before age ½ but in or after the year you turn . in that circumstance you can get money out of the k without paying the customary penalty for being under age ½. october be living up to its infamous reputation as a volatile month for stocks with major indexes down sharply and there be likely more pain ahead for investors according to one prominent wall street analyst. providing critical information for the u.s . trading day . subscribe to marketwatch free need to know newsletter . sign up here. related tesla sales in the u.s . be gaining on bmw and other luxury car makers each unit currently rents for per month . there be no mortgage and the largest annual expenses be taxes and insurance which total about per year . the property be in good condition and i do not anticipate any major expenses in the near future . there be minor repairs and maintenance throughout the year which typically cost no more than . the question for early retirees is to what am i dedicating my freedom it really not about how many millions you have suze assertion . nor how much play you can do before you get bored and go back to your old job. then there be other economic policies at risk katz added trade relations with canada and china loose regulations on small businesses . democrats seem to want to return to a higher tax higher regulation and bigger government environment he said . as we have seen from the previous administration this be not good for economic growth job creation and in the long term fundamental strength of the stock market. read women live longer than men everywhere here why the mistake committed by the financial institution was the reason the day window was missed a pain medication being developed by pharmaceutical giants pfizer inc . and eli lilly co . showed promise in a large clinical trial as a treatment for osteoarthritis the companies said late tuesday. to be sure obvious factors in a home sale including property location and the timing of the sale accounted for about of home price variability . another or so be determined by such standard housing attributes as square footage the year of construction and number of bathrooms . but just under of pricing variables had to do with the visual images the researchers plotted . that sliver could have a big impact on a home pricing it accounted for of the price for the mean sampled home. in your money or your life we promised fi as a reward for systematically examining your relationship with money . i think this be what most people attracted to fire really want . independence of thought . of how they use their time . of options . of choices . of dedicating their attention to something less soul searing than cubicle life or the endless boring meetings of middle management . retirement and freedom be two different animals . doing nothing and doing your passion full time be not even the same species. the backlash could grow after turkish president recep tayyip erdogan on tuesday described the killing of khashoggi as a vicious violent murder and said turkey had strong evidence that this murder was planned. after initially denying any involvement in the disappearance the saudis said friday that the journalist a u.s . resident died following an altercation inside the saudi consulate in istanbul on oct . . the researchers also tested whether the appearance of neighboring homes impact value and they concluded that there a strong spillover from the visually predicted price of a neighbor home. in fact the closer the better neighboring homes on the same street rather than on nearby streets have the biggest impact. i suspect that suze had a blast in her own way but she did not find anything in herself that was not suze so crawled back into that identity and then asked to be on fire bloggers podcasts to relaunch suze. in the oct . filing alibabababa . said with the benefit of evidence obtained through discovery they believe that the cryptocurrency firm has published further promotional material that uses its trademarks to align itself with the chinese conglomerate which helped in its attempt to raise . million in an initial coin offering ico a crowdfunding tool for crypto related ventures. trump said inept politicians in puerto rico were trying to use ridiculously high amounts of hurricane relief to pay off debts . as the washington post pointed out however neither puerto rico gov . ricardo rosselló or a federal board that oversees the territory finances have argued that federal disaster relief funds should be used to directly pay off debts. on friday the sox index hit a so called death cross or when the day moving average crosses below the day moving average a technical indicator that suggests a bear market be on the horizon . the last time the sox index day moving average was below its day moving average was april according to factset data . since then the sox index has rallied compared with a gain in the nasdaq and advance in the s p . what even weirder the professors note be that this phenomenon has persisted even though everyone now knows about it. see worth the splash here how and for how much americans be upgrading their bathrooms there be unlimited downside risk in the market right now and i do not think it being respected he wrote . it not until afterwards that they ask what happened ’ when the bottom falls out that when the blaming begins. but first about wall street and witchcraft . and no this be not a trick. on top of that some companies were slated to report earnings including several megacap companies with investors seeking the degree to which higher interest rates be impacting the economy as the federal reserve has indicated it will continue to tighten monetary policy by year end. marijuana stocks suffered broad and sharp losses monday and were headed for their worst five session skid in over eight months as full legalization in canada appears to have taken the shine off the sector despite early indications of strong demand. get a daily roundup of the top reads in personal finance delivered to your inbox . subscribe to marketwatch free personal finance daily newsletter . sign up here. i think many effective women leaders be justifiably confused when they get vague feedback like this as well as other nonactionable suggestions for improvement. united technologies corp . utx .  reversed earlier losses to add . after the firm beat third quarter profit and sales expectations. there really no economic justification for not allowing the a la carte menu like the showpal model harris said in an interview . i think there a real potential there just because technology has changed how we search for homes. get a daily roundup of the top reads in personal finance delivered to your inbox . subscribe to marketwatch free personal finance daily newsletter . sign up here. the ubs team offered caveats such as the fact that they have included tariff equivalents for non tariff barriers that would arise in a hard brexit . we wanted to give some sense of the jump in trade disruption the economists wrote. please click here for the updated chart showing money flows in marijuana stocks. democratic senate candidate beto o’rourke has topped all other american politicians in spending on facebook ads according to a new report from the social network. it be important to understand the most important concept marijuana stocks move based on what happens at the margin . at the margin there be two kinds of players smart money and momo . the chart above separately shows momo money flows and smart money flows . we have been sharing with you for a while that the smart money has been selling marijuana stocks into the strength . we also gave a signal to sell trade around positions in marijuana stocks at the top. for myself post fi life has thrown plenty my way . cancer . the death of a partner . homeowner miseries like a flooded basement failed siding and carpenter ants . but none of this has thrown me . i find that much of what happens in early retirement can be addressed fairly easily through a combination of building close relationships with family and friends insurance a prudent stash in a money market fund level headed and lower cost choices a macgyver diy knack and some gigging. merkel shifts on u.s . gas imports one great detail from the working paper there be considerable variation in both interior and exterior space across boston homes the researchers note . in the next paragraph they could not help but explain further one home in the sample appears to have full bathrooms. retiring forward be using this crisis of identity to grow spiritually or take on some of the bigger issues in the world through volunteering study serving on boards entrepreneurship training or social innovations . or they attend to the relationships they neglected as they hurried to their million or two. in its tuesday note however citron said that while the media has been focused on elon musk eccentric outlandish and at times offensive behavior it has failed to notice the legitimate disruption of the auto industry that be currently being dominated by tesla using all caps. select stocks be now coming into buy zones . the stocks that come into the buy zones may be accumulated by slowly scaling in . in contrast other marijuana stocks should be sold and even sold short betting on a decline . that study was a collaboration between the universities of sydney cambridge edinburgh limerick and ulster . it linked mortality records with the results of population based surveys in the u.k . between and in which participants reported their walking pace . average pace walkers aged years or over experienced a reduction in risk of death from cardiovascular causes. analysts polled by factset expect tesla to report an adjusted loss of cents a share on sales of . billion . that would compare with an adjusted loss of . a share on sales of . billion in the year ago period. that did not stop katie fischer and her husband andrew from trying to go the fsbo route this summer . they were not quite ready to move – the couple be having a home custom built in a school district that seems like a better fit for their two young pre schoolers – but hated to let the red hot des moines market pass them by. having ambition and speaking with authority be not aggressive acts. but even in the narrowest possible construction the cost of funding such a reduction would be several times the funding level needed for the wall the president wants on the southern border of the u.s. in your money or your life we promised fi as a reward for systematically examining your relationship with money . i think this be what most people attracted to fire really want . independence of thought . of how they use their time . of options . of choices . of dedicating their attention to something less soul searing than cubicle life or the endless boring meetings of middle management . retirement and freedom be two different animals . doing nothing and doing your passion full time be not even the same species. i be telling you i just did it for three years on my private island . i retired at . i shut down the suze orman show . i sold five homes . i got rid of five cars . i stopped going on qvc . i stopped writing for oprah magazine . i stopped giving talks . i stopped doing everything and i had a great time for three years . i learned how to fish . i learned how to win tournaments . i learned how to be the captain on my boat . and all of a sudden it was like oh there still stuff for me to do. now . i was in a field that everybody welcomed me back when i came back . they were excited to see me in the halls of nbc and msnbc and everywhere that i went this past week. growth names those reflecting companies whose profits grow consistently and at faster clip than the overall market have come under increasing pressure as investors focus shifted to value stocks while the tech sector which had outperformed other industries this year be also beating a hasty retreat . value investing typically refers to concentrating in shares of companies trading below certain intrinsic measure. the report uses short waiting lines for seniors all of whom it must be pointed out qualify for care under medicare to demonstrate what at risk from a switch to more medicare providing critical information for the u.s . trading day . subscribe to marketwatch free need to know newsletter . sign up here. smart money flows be extremely negative in tilray tlry . and marijuana etf mj . here be the full list. smart money flows be neutral in green organic dutchman holdings tgodf . a new academic paper confirms what real estate agents and reality television shows have been telling homeowners for years curb appeal matters. when it comes to raking in mailbox money residents of some cities be doing better than others . in some cases much much better. the american petroleum institute an industry trade group will release its weekly inventory data late tuesday ahead of the eia supply report. the dow jones industrial average djia .  fell . or . to . after being down more than points earlier . the s p spx .  shed . points or . to . while the nasdaq composite index comp . slid . points or . to . . illinois democrat j.b . pritzker via the jb for governor group ranks third with million in outlays . he be running to become the state governor . pritzker has a commanding . point lead in the realclearpolitics poll average. president donald trump be not just taking credit for rising k balances in his tweets he may be urging americans to vote republican during the coming midterm elections. i suspect that suze had a blast in her own way but she did not find anything in herself that was not suze so crawled back into that identity and then asked to be on fire bloggers podcasts to relaunch suze. do not miss the message older voters will send in the midterm elections pam kostka a serial entrepreneur who be now ceo of a stealth mode mobile startup was given the title dragon lady but she did not change her management approach. credit suisse analyst stephen ju took a similar view projecting ongoing dau attrition for the second half of the year. assuming a tax rate and a pretty generous . in additional gdp per each rebate dollar and now the program costs about billion for a single year. my husband of years be expecting an inheritance payout in the next month or two . he wants to use the money to pay off the mortgage on our home . i am familiar with co mingling and am sure he be as well . if the money be not co mingled will i be required to pay him half of the amount used to pay off the mortgage if we divorce before the end of the year if so be there a set amount of time that has to pass from the time the mortgage be paid until we divorce for me to not be required to repay him it sounds like something out of a ghost story or a fairy tale . but halloween the night of the dead be not just the best time of year for goblins and warlocks. also see already paid less than men women be still asked to do the office housework’ she told me i never backed down from being aggressive or direct just because somebody was going to criticize me for it . i wo not apologize for being a woman . i tend to have a direct communication style which be also penalized in women . women be supposed to be more empathetic in their style but i am more direct and logical . maybe i am that way because i need to be in order to get my voice heard. the ongoing weakness in the yuan usdcny . means demand for dollar denominated commodities from china has undoubtedly been affected . with the chinese stock markets also falling this has probably also reduced their purchasing power razaqzada. he suggests simple activities such as standing up and walking at a casual pace . there be a lot of evidence now that sitting for long periods be bad for health ramadi said . his study enrolled patients with coronary artery disease and an average age of years were men . participants wore an arm band activity monitor for an average of hours a day for five days. read big drops for amd and nvidia fuel death cross for chip sector ahead of earnings when financial advisers meet a new client they may ask lots of questions about income investments and spending habits . then they craft a financial plan built around the client answers addressing areas such as asset allocation taxes and retirement. the rejection line of reasoning her lawyers argued would make rarified achievements like the heisman trophy and an nfl most valuable player awards no big deal . after all the suit claimed trophy winners were confined to members of accredited schools and mvp winners had to play in the small ranks of pro football players. while it was difficult for provinces and experts to predict just what the demand for cannabis would be once legalized the actual demand far exceeds any reasonable expectations said quebec based hexo corp . in a statement . the company added that it has delivered on all orders since full legalization and has also replenished its stock but the shares hexo . hyydf . slid on monday. people do not have to follow my path of service spirituality and social innovation . there be so many ways to use your time for happiness meaning purpose and contribution . at the end of the day we all want to have a well lived life . five houses and five cars and a private island without a higher purpose mean nothing. financial advisers registered with state regulators or the securities and exchange commission owe clients a duty of undivided loyalty and utmost good faith. you should ask this adviser and any future adviser are you a fiduciary see if he be registered . check the national association of personal financial advisors and cfp board to see if he was ever disciplined . this could be a public letter of admonition a temporary suspension of the individual cfp certification or its permanent revocation depending on the severity and circumstances. i would appreciate your input on this . i am looking at doing a like kind transfer of her holdings to a large discount broker which my sister agrees with . if he was taking advantage of the situation do we contact a particular government branch re financial fraud even before dementia my mother was not a well informed investor and i am regretting not following her investments closer. the stock market opened with a resounding thud on tuesday morning as the dow jones industrial average djia . at one point had shed more than points . the s p index spx .  and the nasdaq composite comp .  endured even harder hits down more than each. smart money flows be only mildly negative in aurora cannabis acb . and canopy growth cgc . veres adds that because many people have not considered what they really want out of life an adviser can forge lasting bonds with clients by facilitating this all important discovery process. related as powerful new opioid nears fda approval critics ask if u.s . be stoking its drug crisis the trial safety results will likely be a particular focus of investor scrutiny . in clinical trials held years ago individuals with osteoarthritis had their conditions worsen while taking this class of drugs . for pfizer pfe .  and eli lilly lly .  drug tanezumab that concern and a related clinical hold delayed development by several years. evidence submitted was completely ignored fortino brown said. retiring forward be using this crisis of identity to grow spiritually or take on some of the bigger issues in the world through volunteering study serving on boards entrepreneurship training or social innovations . or they attend to the relationships they neglected as they hurried to their million or two. related pfizer eli lilly non opioid pain drug nears finish line vicki robin the co author of your money or your life be often called one of the founders of the fire movement . this be an abridged version of a blog post suze orman a wet blanket on fire that appeared on her website. would you like to sign up to an email alert when a new moneyist column has been published if so click on this link. speaking to reporters in the oval office trump also said he did not have proof that there were people from the middle east traveling in the caravan making its way to the u.s . at one point trump turned to vice president mike pence for an update on the situation . pence said the caravan was being backed by leftist organizations and venezuela . and the democrats maybe trump said gesturing toward sen . tom carper a democrat who was on hand for a bill signing. the tariffs would particularly affect german car makers which last year sold . million new vehicles in the u.s . according to the vda the main lobby group for germany auto industry. since there was no momo crowd buying selling from smart money initially drove marijuana stocks down but not by a lot . then the momo crowd panicked and started aggressively selling . with both momo crowd and smart money selling there were several technical breakdowns . a lot of money be tied to technical trading on wall street . such money started selling on technical breakdowns making the drop worse. a self certified waiver be typically available for distributions deposited into accounts that individuals mistakenly think be eligible iras or retirement plans . for example if you believe an ira rollover occurred but the funds ended up in an account was not an ira then this misclassification should lead to the ability to correct the error. tesla stock skyrockets after legendary short seller goes long have breaking news sent to your inbox . subscribe to marketwatch free bulletin emails . sign up here. read here one way to avoid surprise medical bills annabel liu who works at a stealth startup and was previously vice president of engineering at linkedin received similar feedback she was told she had an aggressive and authoritarian style . her way of responding to this was to evolve her brand to be less abrasive while still being assertive. though companies be becoming much better about analyzing and correcting for when women salaries be not commensurate with men it seems that performance reviews need to be subjected to the same scrutiny. the fed the trump the ebola or whatever excuse du jour be being regurgitated on the various media outlets parets wrote . the only one to blame be ourselves. earnings analysts surveyed by factset expect snap to post a loss per share of cents an improvement from a cents a share loss last year. on the positive side you be seeing the first pointer given in how to potentially become a marijuana millionaire albeit carefully coming into play . astute marijuana investors will take advantage of the drop and may end up making money in the long run . let explore the real reason for the decline in marijuana stocks with the help of a chart. nymex crude futures have now dropped below their day moving average which robert yawger director energy at mizuho securities u.s.a . pegged at . . the day moving average has not been violated in over a year he said. providing critical information for the u.s . trading day . subscribe to marketwatch free need to know newsletter . sign up here. it a market defined by failure not working the way it should harris said . this be why they call realtors a cartel . there be some evidence that they will consciously steer clients away from fsbo or even away from deals with brokers that offer lower commissions. you encounter one of the exceptions described above that a reference to ideas from medicare for all proposals to universal basic income to jobs guarantees that have been proposed by politicians such as sen . bernie sanders and democratic congressional candidate alexandria ocasio cortez . even teen vogue has launched a broadside against capitalism. while the s p index be just minus . off the sept . high the average s p stocks be off minus from its week high thus much selling on the stock level has already taken place he wrote in a note . the fact that the s p managed to close higher on just of the last trading days a very rare streak shows just how much selling has already occurred. a white house official who saw the tweet said medicare for all differs from the current medicare advantage program since the latter has many payers and cost sharing and allows competing health plans and supplemental programs from the private sector. the companies be cautiously optimistic about the path forward but more data be still needed especially from a large safety study for which results be expected next year said ken verburg clinical program development lead at pfizer. now she suing to overturn the denial and her lawyers say the rejection shows how the united states citizenship and immigration services be becoming more denial oriented on employment visas bids under president donald trump. elsewhere shares of tilray inc.tlry . slumped . canopy growth corp.cgc . slid . cronos group inc.cron . reversed earlier losses to trade up . hexo corp.hyydf . hexo . gained . aleafia health inc.aleaf . rose . aphria inc.aphqf . aph . tacked on . gw pharmaceuticals plcgwph . edged up . and medmen enterprises inc.mmnff . declined . . the chart so what do you do with the money your child has inherited you could invest a portion of it for eight years until she graduates from high school . it might help her to have her trust fund then . even then of course she could choose a public college in her own state and take out minimal student loans . when the blossoms come out every spring and she be studying for her college exams she will be reassured by the nest egg that be growing every year. wife in ohio as stocks in china plumb new lows global investors can be forgiven for feeling some jitters as they recall the ripples sent through global financial markets by the country steep selloff in . for example the ishares msci acwi ex us etf acwx . a popular fund used to invest in stocks outside the u.s . be down . so far in compared with a . gain for the s p even when factoring recent declines . a popular emerging market oriented exchange traded fund the ishares msci emerging markets etf eem . has lost nearly in the first months of the year. the differences between k s and iras come in a variety of forms and there be a lot of angles to this issue . i will only be able to address a few of these differences in this limited space . talking to a good financial planner would be wise especially with little time to attend to these matters yourself . i have look for a fee only financial planner at the national association of personal financial advisors www.napfa.org and the financial planning association . there be many good fee based planners but true fee only planners have fewer clearer and more easily managed conflicts and be subject to fiduciary duty at all times. i commend you making plans while your daughter be years old . and yes it be tempting to give your daughter all the advantages in life that you never had. the u.s . unemployment rate could have a bigger impact on european car makers than a possible change in price because of president trump threat to impose tariffs on them according to a new report from morningstar. they found that there a halloween effect in almost every market and it especially pronounced in the most actively traded and liquid markets such as here in the u.s . and in developed markets overseas. o’rourke a texas congressman who be aiming to unseat republican sen . ted cruz has spent . million on such ads since may when facebook inc.fb . started its new ad archive . the outlay has come through a group called beto for texas. naples typically does not make it to the top of america richest cities lists but its citizens be above average when it comes to their finances . the median household income there be according to the u.s . census bureau compared to a national average of . he laid out some more troubling divergences but you get the idea . parets who was much more bullish on stocks over the summer now sees a crash on the horizon and he recommends investors lighten their equity load. shares of stoxx europe autos and parts index sxap . a popular gauge of europe auto market be down . so far in october and on track for a . year to date decline. get a daily roundup of the top reads in personal finance delivered to your inbox . subscribe to marketwatch free personal finance daily newsletter . sign up here. salem be to halloween as new orleans be to mardi gras . the witches ghosts and ghouls will be out in force this week . during my recent visit i took warren buffett advice and sought stock advice from a genuine bona fide fortune teller more on that below . snap has historically delivered a better user experience for apple inc . aapl .  ios users of the snapchat app than for android users but a reversal in the company user trends hinges on a change in this dynamic. intention counts as much as timing . your husband might be the nicest guy in the world . or he may be someone who has treated you very badly over the years . you may have given up years of peak earning potential to raise a family . or perhaps you have both had your fair share of good and bad behavior . i will refrain from judging given that i do not know the circumstances and leave the soul searching up to you . waiting for him to spend his inheritance however seems opportunistic. as a result volatility be likely to remain elevated for now as bulls and bears continue to face off for control of the market . the cboe volatility index vix .  spiked to . tuesday . experts view the vix below as low and above as high relative to the gauge historical average. the biggest thing be letting go of the idea that you be the expert and they be not veres cautioned . they be the expert in what they want and where they want to get to . your role be helping them get there not telling them what to do. in marijuana related stocks smart money flows be negative for gw pharmaceuticals gwph . scotts miracle gro smg . and constellation brands stz . dear peggy marijuana stocks took another broad beating on tuesday but a bounce off their worst levels was not enough to stop the sector from suffering a sixth straight loss. in a statement carreira parents said their daughter and ponomarenko have been proudly representing the united states of america at many different international events and winning various medals in the process. the etfmg alternative harvest exchange traded fundmj . tumbled . . the etf has lost amid a five session losing streak the worst five day performance since the etf inception on dec . . want news about europe delivered to your inbox subscribe to marketwatch free europe daily newsletter . sign up here. veres cautions seasoned advisers to ward off complacency . he finds that some of them cling to outdated legacy systems or refuse to broaden their appeal to attract the next generation of clients. among them as a seller you have to be driving the process . that difficult . folks that be selling their homes have busy lives and jobs and sometimes more than anything you rely on a realtor to just keep the process moving forward. we do not understand the reason why the uscics be not giving any recognition to those awards and the fact that they be the u.s . junior national champions and denying christina the ability to represent the united states at the next olympic games. disclosure subscribers to the arora report may have positions in the securities mentioned in this article or may take positions at any time . nigam arora be an investor engineer and nuclear physicist by background who has founded two inc . fastest growing companies . he be the founder of the arora report which publishes four newsletters . nigam can be reached at nigam thearorareport.com. revenue the factset consensus calls for revenue of . million up from . million in the year earlier period . snap forecast revenue of million to million . according to estimize which crowdsources estimates from hedge fund managers academics and others snap be expected to show sales of . million. would you like to sign up to an email alert when a new moneyist column has been published if so click on this link. next came bridgeport stamford norwalk conn . where the average income from dividends and qualified dividends were and respectively. the board approved a five year fiscal plan tuesday the post said . the plan projects that billion in anticipated federal disaster funds will bolster the u.s . territory economy better positioning it to pay off debts in the future. on the positive side you be seeing the first pointer given in how to potentially become a marijuana millionaire albeit carefully coming into play . astute marijuana investors will take advantage of the drop and may end up making money in the long run . let explore the real reason for the decline in marijuana stocks with the help of a chart. so you must positioning yourself for that tasty bounce we have grown accustomed to over the course of this stubborn bull market . well do not warns j.c . parets the technical analyst behind the all star charts blog. salem mass . where better to explore the connection between witchcraft and wall street than this spooky old new england town it been linked to the occult since the witch trials of the s and now hosts so many psychics mystics and fortune tellers that they be licensed and regulated by city ordinance. one of the most surprising outcomes of fischer experience may be that the offer she accepted came from a buyer represented by a realtor meaning she and andrew paid that broker fee . there was just a little bit of a comfort level with knowing that the buyer had been vetted by a professional fischer told marketwatch even though showpal will also help with that part of the process . even after paying that commission fischer estimates the family saved nearly in the transaction and hundreds more at closing. the first thing you should consider be simplicity . if you be happy with your current employer k it will be simpler for you to roll everything into your current k plan . a good plan has a variety of investment options and low fees. have breaking news sent to your inbox . subscribe to marketwatch free bulletin emails . sign up here. also read fema director denies he was asked to resign questions puerto rico death toll. president trump be credited by foes and fans alike with a capacity not only to attract attention at will but to trigger the reaction he desires whether ire or ardor distraction or elation . even close observers be at times left wondering precisely what they have heard and seen and how they should respond. suze orman did a smackdown of the fire financial independence retire early movement on paula pant podcast . she said she hates it hates it hates it. interesting since her publicist asked paula for the interview as well as asking this of other fire podcasters in order to push suze new book products and events . talk about inviting yourself to dinner and then complaining about the food what trump tweet about your retirement plan really says is if democrats get control of congress they will repeal his tax reform which will hurt the economy employment and wage growth said allan katz founder of comprehensive wealth management group in staten island n.y . his tweets be calculated katz said . he knows what he trying to accomplish and it has nothing to do with your k but the midterm election. elsewhere italy was told to revise its budget by the european commission on tuesday according to news reports as the jostling between the country antiestablishment government and brussels persists. facebook released its ad archive report on tuesday saying it part of its efforts to increase transparency in advertising. the silicon valley company be making changes after getting criticized this year for how groups used its platform during the u.s . presidential campaign. opinion suze orman missed the point of retirement and that why she went back to work analysts polled by factset expect tesla to report an adjusted loss of cents a share on sales of . billion . that would compare with an adjusted loss of . a share on sales of . billion in the year ago period. other chip related companies reporting earnings this week include silicon laboratories inc . slab .  on wednesday and cypress semiconductor corp . cy . entegris inc . entg .  and monolithic power systems inc . mpwr .  on thursday. those taking tanezumab meanwhile reported statistically significant improvements on three different measures of their condition including pain and physical function as compared with the placebo. first place was the naples fla . area . nearly of the tax returns from that area show capital gains and the average reported from those gains was just under smartasset found. the lawsuit lists a number of defendants that include alibabacoin foundation aka abbc foundation abbc block chain it solutions llc alibabacoin general trading fze alibabacoin foundation llc and jason daniel paul philip and hasan abbas the founders of the company. after sharing some details pushing some stones around on a table shuffling a deck of cards and thinking deep thoughts i got to ask one question. adding to trade war concerns a recent morgan stanley survey of chip distributors found that oversupply indicators currently look worse than those encountered in the sectors last big down turn in . down an alley i found a magic store offering readings . at the back behind the bric a brac i crossed a man palm with silver actually with green paper for a quick reading on tarot cards . anyone expecting a mysterious levitating genie in a flowing robe would be disappointed . he was a bald dude who did not look noticeably different from your average new england patriots fan. a reduction then would cost billion for one year or . trillion over a decade. if the first step be admitting there a problem snap has done as much . in a detailed memo leaked to cheddar chief executive evan spiegel told employees that he rushed the recent snapchat redesign and discussed his ambitious goal of reaching profitability in . and in light of our forecasts that china economy will continue to lose momentum and that the u.s . economy will slow sharply in we expect them to continue to underperform they said in a tuesday note . this would be consistent with what has happened in previous economic downturns. in his latest tweet about k plans on sunday the president touted the best jobs numbers in the history of our great country and said democrats could never do nearly as well . so why would not we win the midterms he said . think of what will happen to your now beautiful k’s the returns for the other six months of the year from may to october just . . no kidding . that as the authors dryly note was less than you could have earned on average in the bank. taxable interest income be defined as money people earned from savings accounts and certificates of deposit . dividends be from ownership of stocks qualified dividends be those people have owned long enough to meet the irs holding period qualification . and capital gains income be the money earned by selling assets including stocks and bonds. an important pointer for investors to carefully make millions in marijuana stocks be to learn how to properly size their positions and how to build the position sizes correctly. hello there marketwatchers . check out the moneyist private facebook group where we look for answers to life thorniest money issues . readers write in to me with all sorts of dilemmas inheritance wills divorce tipping gifting . i often talk to lawyers accountants financial advisers and other experts in addition to offering my own thoughts . i receive more letters than i could ever answer so i will be bringing all of that guidance including some you might not see in these columns to this group . post your questions tell me what you want to know more about or weigh in on the latest moneyist columns. in a recent interview with russian news agency tass that also served to keep a lid on oil prices monday the saudi energy minister khalid al falih said saudi arabia would increase crude production to million barrels a day compared with its current average of . million barrels a day . al falih said his job was to implement the government constructive and responsible role in stabilizing the world energy markets. mike o’rourke chief market strategist at jonestrading said that caterpillar and m earnings be providing evidence that the twin headwinds of rising inflation and the effects of new tariffs be starting to take a bite out of profits . caterpillar citing rising costs shows that the trade war be hitting home he said . it industrials like caterpillar that struggle when you be at a cyclical top he added suggesting that the stock struggles do not bode well for the market going forward. i have no clue what these long term bonds be doing in this portfolio . was this a poor decision which will definitely result in losses if we sell the bonds before the end of the coupon date everything be set up as a trust with shares to be divided equally between my sister and i upon my mother passing with a percentage distributed to my children. the awards were not directly awarded to you the august decision said . they were awarded for your performance as part of a sports team… w e do not consider such honors to be a nationally or internationally recognized prize or award for excellence in the field of endeavor because it be limited to members of that association and participants of those competitions. this mother has a similar dilemma to you . she wants to give her daughter every advantage too but her family had experienced generations of poverty . she has nothing . in some ways instilling opportunity and ambition and wonderment in a child costs the price of a library card and your time . this woman reached out to reddit and users on that site told her to visit a library at least once a week go places that do not cost money read together as a family and often. pfizer shares have surged over the last three months and eli lilly shares have surged compared with a . decline in the s p spx . while several u.s . lawmakers have called for exploring possible sanctions on saudi arabia the trump administration has been seen as reluctant to pursue measures particularly as renewed sanctions on iran take full effect next month. he laid out some more troubling divergences but you get the idea . parets who was much more bullish on stocks over the summer now sees a crash on the horizon and he recommends investors lighten their equity load. another divergence we have not seen since the top and before that the top be the relationship between consumer staples and the broader market. djia . on monday dow industrials and the s p closed lower while the nasdaq bucked the trend to edge higher. see snap stock volatile after first quarterly guidance and user decline providing critical information for the u.s . trading day . subscribe to marketwatch free need to know newsletter . sign up here. despite the pot stock sector selloff a study on the american consumer conducted by gfk mri in collaboration with miner company studio estimates that over million u.s . adults or of the adult population use marijuana with of the population consumer it at least once a month and using on a daily basis. tesla inc . stock rallied more than tuesday after famed short seller citron research turned long on it saying that the model be a proven hit and that many of the warning signs about the silicon valley car maker have proven to be insignificant. you make the call. china downturn appeared to spark a global equity selloff that saw european shares fall and u.s . stocks decline with the dow jones industrial average djia .  falling points at its session low before paring losses to end around points lower a decline of . . the s p spx .  fell . tuesday. they be preparing to update their paper to include dramatically expanded research. i think there be retiring forward and retiring backward . suze did what many early retirees do . she left her day job . she got rid of excess not needed in a post job life . for most it getting rid of the car to impress clients or five suits for a weekly rotation at the office . for suze it was five cars and five homes. related tesla sales in the u.s . be gaining on bmw and other luxury car makers do you have questions about inheritance tipping weddings family feuds friends or any tricky issues relating to manners and money send them to marketwatch moneyist and please include the state where you live no full names will be used . for myself post fi life has thrown plenty my way . cancer . the death of a partner . homeowner miseries like a flooded basement failed siding and carpenter ants . but none of this has thrown me . i find that much of what happens in early retirement can be addressed fairly easily through a combination of building close relationships with family and friends insurance a prudent stash in a money market fund level headed and lower cost choices a macgyver diy knack and some gigging. it was not the riskiest or the most exciting thing to do with her lump sum especially given her family history with reckless investments and more than a dash of bad luck but it was the smartest . i collect rent from some apartments i own in the city she told me . that allows me to be an author and focus much of my attention on writing . it been a journey learning about finance and real estate and being independent . i had to figure it out on my own. third quarter results arrive nearly three weeks after musk took swipes at the securities and exchange commission and at short sellers by calling the sec the shortseller enrichment commission. meanwhile china has been readying a fresh round of monetary and fiscal stimulus to help support its economy and its stock market with the government recently announcing plans for boosting bond financing for private firms and cutting taxes for households. the hardest hit chip stocks in october have been nvidia corp . nvda . and advanced micro devices inc . amd . which be down and respectively in the month to date . they be followed by shares of micron technology inc . mu .  and microchip technology inc . mchp . which be both down around for the month. i own two other properties my primary residence and a vacation home and my work income be sufficient to live on without the rental income . i travel a lot and use some of the rental income for that and invest whatever be left. i am semi retired at the age of and plan to fully retire in two years . i have a number of retirement accounts including traditional sep and roth iras and have no debt. the fed the trump the ebola or whatever excuse du jour be being regurgitated on the various media outlets parets wrote . the only one to blame be ourselves. dear moneyist if a taxpayer family member dies they may be granted a waiver . as an illustration in one case a taxpayer husband died after taking money out of his ira and transferring it to a personal bank account . while managing her husband estate she realized a rollover had not occurred and the day window had passed . in this case the irs allowed the taxpayer to complete the rollover notwithstanding the fact that the day period had expired . in other cases the state of mind of the mourning taxpayer was considered in allowing a valid rollover after the day period. the case follows an attempt in april which was denied on the grounds that alibaba has not met its burden to establish a reasonable probability that the court has personal jurisdiction over alibabacoin which be listed as being based in both dubai and belarus. fiers might travel to exotic places . for some it backpacking . for suze it was living on her private island. usually when someone digs up a strategy or anomaly like this all the world jumps into it and the advantage gets traded away . but not this time . it seems to defy economic gravity they write . it does not disappear or reverse itself as theory dictates it should… the fact that trading on this strategy be particularly simple makes its continued existence even more surprising. do not miss should we hide our silicon valley wealth from our children according to the congressional budget office the u.s . will collect . trillion in individual income taxes in the current september ending fiscal year and . trillion over a decade. tesla surprised markets on monday by setting the date for its third quarter results about two weeks earlier than its usual date . tesla did not return a request for comment from marketwatch late monday about the decision to fast forward earnings with little notice. tesla inc . stock rallied more than tuesday after famed short seller citron research turned long on it saying that the model be a proven hit and that many of the warning signs about the silicon valley car maker have proven to be insignificant. musk has vowed to show profits in the third and fourth quarters. i would like her to go to private school but we can not afford that either . but she could . i am really torn. mike o’rourke chief market strategist at jonestrading said that caterpillar and m earnings be providing evidence that the twin headwinds of rising inflation and the effects of new tariffs be starting to take a bite out of profits . caterpillar citing rising costs shows that the trade war be hitting home he said . it industrials like caterpillar that struggle when you be at a cyclical top he added suggesting that the stock struggles do not bode well for the market going forward. read marketwatch interview with vicki robin whitbread plcwtb .   said it would distribute a significant amount of the proceeds from the sale to shareholders. providing critical information for the u.s . trading day . subscribe to marketwatch free need to know newsletter . sign up here. in marijuana related stocks smart money flows be negative for gw pharmaceuticals gwph . scotts miracle gro smg . and constellation brands stz . fair warning using the self certification process may be an audit trigger for the irs . however you should be fine if coach carson posted a balanced informative response appreciating suze admonition to be sure you have enough for a risk free retirement . suze enumerated a string what can go wrong scenarios as evidence that early retirement on less than million leaves you vulnerable when life hands you lemons a whole tree of lemons . he and mmm responded evenhandedly but ultimately here what carson said she got wrong thanks phil investors betting on a snap inc . turnaround do not have to look far for inspiration. one top ranked canadian born ice skater wants to bring america the gold but immigration authorities say she not special enough to deserve a path to citizenship. in short the researchers found looks do matter . and yes incentives also play a role but our understanding of them may be fuzzy. the short seller had long held that by the time of the model arrival multiple mile range electric vehicles would have been on the market it said tuesday. in march it predicted the stock would fall to by year end . citron andrew left be also among the several investors and short sellers who have filed class action lawsuits against tesla for alleged securities law violations stemming from chief executive elon musk going private tweets in august. as a general rule rollovers will not be accepted by a financial institution after the day rollover period has expired . if however you use the boiler plate document from the appendix of revenue procedure and give this short form to the trustee of the company to which you be rolling your funds then the financial institution will treat the distribution as a qualified rollover . in addition to using the form you should complete the rollover as soon as possible there be a day safe harbor period after the reason for the delay no longer prevents the taxpayer from making the contribution . during the interview he also said the saudis want to sign a new cooperation agreement that be open ended with no fixed term which would allow the organization of the petroleum exporting countries and non opec countries to lift or lower production as needed to balance the market. he sees real estate as no different than other behemoth markets that be now being dragged into the st century like car sharing and short term home rentals have been upended by uber and airbnb . and for now there be still opportunities for real estate agents to offer their services on a contract basis for showpal transactions. the white house maintains that if the united states implemented policies similar to those in place in nordic countries in the s american families earning the average wage would be taxed to more per year net of transfers . the report concludes u.s . gdp would decline by about per year per person if s style nordic policies were in place and by per year if highly socialist policies were in place. dear concerned only after a series of searching conversations can an adviser create a truly comprehensive financial plan . better yet the savvy adviser guides the client to stay on track and make needed adjustments to attain goals. check out marketwatch comprehensive coverage of the cannabis sector including profiles of a number of key players in one place. taxable interest income be defined as money people earned from savings accounts and certificates of deposit . dividends be from ownership of stocks qualified dividends be those people have owned long enough to meet the irs holding period qualification . and capital gains income be the money earned by selling assets including stocks and bonds. u.k . leisure group whitbread be set to sell costa coffee chain to u.s . soft drinks maker coca cola for roughly £ bn or . billion . if your principal residence was damaged you may be able to receive a waiver e.g . your house was damaged during the day period by a hurricane . an important note about this provision be that damage to one home may not be enough to grant a waiver in and of itself . it would be helpful to show that the damage actively prevented you from completing the rollover. for sale by owner be not for everybody torstenson told marketwatch but if we were able to solve some of the friction points and educate the community that they can do it empower them to do it then we said this needs to happen in the real estate market. not everyone agrees that your husband paying off your mortgage be a problem . it will likely be water under the bridge unless he could really prove you orchestrated the depletion of his separate property says randy kessler an atlanta based lawyer and author of divorce protect yourself your kids and your future. kessler does not advise against it . you have be in a better position than if the money was still in his separate account. again my caveat it may not go your way. heart patients spend most of their waking hours sitting lying down but remaining sedentary for long periods could shorten their life research suggests . taking breaks and burning more than calories per day should help prolong their life said ailar ramadi postdoctoral fellow in the faculty of rehabilitation medicine at university of alberta edmonton and author of the latest paper. analysts at aj bell said the focus for whitbread would now be on its chain of premier inn hotels. semiconductor related stocks were leading a broader tech selloff in october and showing a technical bearish signal from one index as the sector heads into the peak of earnings season amid concerns about a trade war with china. traders focused on saudi arabia pledge to play a responsible role in energy markets despite international criticism over the killing of dissident journalist jamal khashoggi. your original intent was to rollover the funds in the stated period . early retirees be not wild risk takers . they be calculated risk takers . they see the old bargain of a to job until they be as riskier than an early retirement. mcdonald corp . mcd .  led dow advancers rising . after announcing third quarter results. check out marketwatch comprehensive coverage of the cannabis sector including profiles of a number of key players there be documentation that proves the claim do not miss how a no deal brexit could play out for u.k . stocks would you like to sign up to an email alert when a new moneyist column has been published if so click on this link. even though immigration officials in past administrations were not the fairest according to piston now adjudicators be no longer acting like adjudicators but opposing counsels. democrats have been critical of trump tax law known as the tax cuts and jobs act of . no democrats voted for the tax bill last year and have continued to criticize it saying it mostly benefits wealthy households . they have also argued the tax law will increase federal budget deficits for the foreseeable future while republicans countered the tcja will boost the u.s . economy. see will midterm elections sink the stock market here what history says hello there marketwatchers . check out the moneyist facebook group where we look for answers to life thorniest money issues . readers write in to me with all sorts of dilemmas inheritance wills divorce tipping gifting . i often talk to lawyers accountants financial advisers and other experts in addition to offering my own thoughts . i receive more letters than i could ever answer so i will be bringing all of that guidance including some you might not see in these columns to this group . post your questions tell me what you want to know more about or weigh in on the latest moneyist columns. m co . mmm . stock dropped . after the company third quarter profit and revenue missed and it issued downbeat guidance . together m co . and caterpillar combined to account for nearly half the dow loss at tuesday open when you consider everything that be happening right now italy brexit saudi arabia a chinese growth slowdown trade wars the pending u.s . midterm elections and i could go on almost all the news we see every day be bad . the surprise be not that markets be reacting it be that markets did not react sooner and that they have not reacted harder wrote brad mcmillan chief investment officer at commonwealth financial network in a note . we can expect more volatility . but with strong economic fundamentals in place it be reasonable to conclude that this turbulence be probably just another or i.e . a sharp pullback that will be reversed in the next couple of months. this article be reprinted by permission from nextavenue.org twin cities public television inc . all rights reserved. torstenson argues that the showpal model be resilient no matter what market you be in in a buyer market sellers need to watch every penny whereas if homes be flying off the market there no reason to pay a commission . but blomquist thinks agents really do show their value for whichever side of the transaction be under pressure meaning that while sellers might be able to go it alone now that could soon change. harley davidson inc . hog . fell . even after surprising investors with faster international retail sales growth that put third quarter earnings and revenue well beyond analysts estimates . separately the company announced a voluntary recall of motorcycles over a hydraulic clutch assembly. i wish you the best taking care of your mother in her final years and making sure those years be free of financial worries and comfortable. in his decision judge paul oetken said renewed application for a preliminary injection be granted adding it enjoins defendants from using the alibaba marks as alibaba has defined that term in its application for a preliminary injunction alone or in combination with any words terms designations marks or designs as well as any mark image or depiction that be confusingly similar to or likely to impair the distinctiveness of the alibaba marks anywhere in the united states. and it would appear that there be a double standard . an article in the harvard business review which looked at performance reviews within one company revealed bias in this type of feedback . the results tallied the number of references to being too aggressive in the reviews and not surprisingly of the instances were attributed to women while only of men were identified as having such a communication style. the first thing to consider be the income tax paid currently by taxpayers. fischer has high praise for the company support and communication and she loved showpatrol the company on site showing service noting that trying to do an open house yourself be super awkward. the recent rebound was a dead cat bounce said michael wilson an equity strategist at morgan stanley in a report . we look for confirmation with a definitive break of the s p through its day moving average. pending regulatory approval in europe and china the sale will close during the first half of next year. the chairman of the white house council of economic advisers kevin hassett defended the report . i think that my role at cea be not to be a politician but to be an analyst he said on a conference call . and if our study convinced people of all parties that if they rely on central planning and try to reduce the influence of private property by either specifically nationalizing things or regulating and taxing things just about into oblivion that that would be bad for the overall economy then i would feel like the paper had accomplished its objective. the professors call it a puzzle. or be it something creepier the halloween effect has lasted at least since the days of the salem witch trials they found . they have stock market data for london going back to the s . over that period calculate jacobsen and zhang an investor who only bought at halloween each year and then sold six months later would have trounced the overall stock market returns. vicki robin the co author of your money or your life be often called one of the founders of the fire movement . this be an abridged version of a blog post suze orman a wet blanket on fire that appeared on her website. showpal torstenson be more blunt . while it has value to the realtor i be not sure it has value to the consumer he said . and he believes consumers be driving the activity on the buyer side of the transaction by browsing sites like zillow. and see how corporate america lobbying on tariffs has surged in one chart for veres embracing a fee only model be only part of the answer . another key to success involves harnessing the latest technological tools from online appointment scheduling apps to electronic signature software to maximize operational efficiency. also see how low will the dow go brace yourself for the worst case scenario read italy be the no . risk factor in the fourth quarter for european investments if it does not happen then so be it . but why not be aware that it be certainly on the table and the evidence be piling up he said . what if we just grind sideways for six months and do not collapse either way crash or long sideways grind i still do not want to be long. this report was originally published monday. get a daily roundup of the top reads in personal finance delivered to your inbox . subscribe to marketwatch free personal finance daily newsletter . sign up here. if you do not like the current plan you should continue to participate and get your match . you still can make things a little more organized by rolling the k s from prior employers into an ira . you have only have two accounts to deal with your k at your current employer and your ira. read opioids be ravaging the u.s . but they be still the best pain drug we have got chris matthews and barbara kollmeyer contributed to this article to invest successfully in marijuana stocks avoid this one thing spooky no the materials sector briefly slipped into bear market territory earlier tuesday before paring some losses but was still on track for the lowest close in months . the spdr material select sector etf xlb . was down as much as . at an intraday low of . which was . below the jan . record close of . . declines of or more from a bull market peak be viewed by many on wall street as defining a bear market . the sector tracker xlb bounced slightly since and was down . at . in afternoon trade which was . below its record and on track for the lowest close since may . the materials sector was seen as one of the most promising in a trump presidency as it includes companies that would benefit from infrastructure spending including building a border wall and from measures to boost the mining industries . but after running up . in to outpace the s p spx . . rise the xlb has tumbled . so far this year compared with a . rise in the s p . read dow plunges amid corporate outlook china selloff also see why be not there enough houses to buy they also noted remarks by guo shuqing chairman of the china banking and insurance regulatory commission who called on banking institutions to properly manage risk in their stock pledge business while allowing insurers to launch special products that would provide liquidity to companies facing pledging related difficulties. . early retirees be not withdrawing from life . they be embracing a purposeful life more fully than ever. hello there marketwatchers . check out the moneyist private facebook group where we look for answers to life thorniest money issues . readers write in to me with all sorts of dilemmas inheritance wills divorce tipping gifting . i often talk to lawyers accountants financial advisers and other experts in addition to offering my own thoughts . i receive more letters than i could ever answer so i will be bringing all of that guidance including some you might not see in these columns to this group . post your questions tell me what you want to know more about or weigh in on the latest moneyist columns. read why the executive exodus at snap could actually be a positive read we be probably at peak housing . here what that means. there be some important differences between now and analysts said . for example authorities appear to be using changes in regulations including allowing insurers to issue special products to fund listed companies and to alleviate stress darby said noting that local governments have also stepped in to backstop share sales. shilpa lawande a ceo and co founder of the artificial intelligence startup in the health care space postscript.us also found herself confronting labels of assertiveness or aggressiveness . she chose to take it as constructive feedback and strove toward finding more balance based on each situation. that the drill . but be it the right one a more comprehensive approach consists of a series of deeper discussions that bob veres calls collaborative planning. a longtime commentator on the financial planning business veres be publisher of inside information an information service for advisers. he began to think about what he calls the value of the realtor to the consumer and the more he researched the more convinced he became that professional real estate agents be redundant. do not miss watch out for dead cat bounce in stocks says morgan stanley wilson circumstances beyond your control prevented the rollover e.g . physical limitations or reliance to your detriment on someone else a separate harvard university study concluded that you could add years to your life by eating a healthy diet exercising minutes or more a day maintaining a healthy weight a body mass index between . and . never smoking and drinking only a moderate amount of alcohol . it analyzed years of data from women and years of data from men. the other common reason to keep everything in a k be if you were planning on doing a so called back door roth ira . a balance in a traditional ira of pretax money from old k s would make that less attractive due to tax consequences and record keeping. . the retirement plans of most early retirees be not naive fragile castles built on sand . at least the ones i know of be anti fragile multilayered flexible plans built on a combination of investment savings retirement accounts side businesses and backup plans. automation also paves the way for aging advisers to improve the long term viability of their practice . rather than continue to impose a minimum asset requirement of million or more for new clients veres posits that those advisers who streamline their operation be better positioned to welcome what he calls the blue ocean of middle income clients who can grow with the firm as they accumulate assets over time. the second chart illustrates how the average global import tariff could climb to levels last seen during george w . bush first presidential term. goldman terry will be looking for commentary on ad prices along with general updates about monetization efforts. i want to share another cautionary tale with you . this one involves a daughter who grew up with everything . her name be frances stroh and she was heir to the stroh beer fortune in detroit . at one point her family company was valued at close to billion . they lost it all . she was left with in stock . she never touched that and used it to invest in technology stocks and real estate . she worked part time and be now a landlord in san francisco with several properties. dear moneyist november natural gas ngx .  added . to settle at . per million british thermal units. cannabis investors have done an about face as marijuana became fully legal for adults in canada on oct . . in the two months leading up to legalization the horizons etf had run up . investors may want to take advantage of the technique we often use at the arora report to double returns and lower risks . in this technique core positions be built by scaling into select stocks in the buy zones for the longer term . then the long term positions be surrounded by short term trades in an opportunistic manner. and people tend to learn new skills . for most it a language or an instrument or home cooking . for suze it was fishing and tournaments and being a captain of a boat. if it does not happen then so be it . but why not be aware that it be certainly on the table and the evidence be piling up he said . what if we just grind sideways for six months and do not collapse either way crash or long sideways grind i still do not want to be long. a china led global equity rout was also seen weighing on sentiment putting pressure on assets perceived as risky including most commodities . u.s . stock indexes also fell tuesday but traded off session lows as oil futures settled. read it time to celebrate what older women bring to the workplace smart money flows be negative in aphria aphqf . cronos cron . neptune nept . and new age beverages nbev . so should investors worry all in all the ubs analysts said the situation looks generally manageable but highlighted the potential risk to small and midcap stocks with high pledge ratios should the selloff continue. read want to know what an ico is what does that mean be that feedback specific enough to make improvement actionable does less aggressive mean to attack but soften the blow or does it mean she should pursue her own interests less forcefully the biggest trap i see be not having a revenue and service model for middle income and younger clients he said . it takes a willingness to change. pratima rao gluckman be author of nevertheless she persisted true stories of women leaders in tech and engineering leader at vmware . for more information visit pratimagluckman.com. read pitfalls of retirement and how to fix them some americans be even worse off considering many be without any retirement plans let alone a k . only of employers offered k plans in according to a january report from two u.s . census bureau researchers. lorraine ell chief executive and senior financial adviser at better money decisions in albuquerque n.m . has other questions do you have capital reserved for future property improvements which will be needed what if the rental be vacant for a period of time be there enough income from other sources you mention you can live on your income without using the rental income but how does that change in two years when you retire at your age will you want the additional work involved in managing rental properties on twitter the short seller also said that the early earnings might be a bad sign for shorts. s p closes down for fifth day as stocks retreat in wake of china selloff a new white house report published tuesday took aim at socialism providing intellectual firepower for the argument president donald trump has been making at campaign rallies. also read opinion the real reason marijuana stocks be falling off a cliff and what to do now. third quarter results arrive nearly three weeks after musk took swipes at the securities and exchange commission and at short sellers by calling the sec the shortseller enrichment commission. to invest successfully in marijuana stocks avoid this one thing first place was the naples fla . area . nearly of the tax returns from that area show capital gains and the average reported from those gains was just under smartasset found. it may come as no surprise that cities already known for being home to the country wealthiest people came out on top. not everyone does this . many retire backward returning to their old professions after they have filled up on travel or hobbies perhaps on their own terms because that where they felt competent needed and truth be told important . many do a bit of both and feel their way along to who they will be and how they might spend their time in this new world of freedom choices and sovereignty. yet homes that be rented rather than owner occupied were not found to suffer a loss of value contrary to a widely held belief . and homes that were resold during the test period did not see an improvement in value versus those that were not resold a sign that owners were not making more upgrades than they might otherwise simply to make a sale. another situation in which a self certification waiver be possible includes cases where a misplaced distribution check was never cashed e.g . the irs granted a waiver to a taxpayer who failed to cash an unrequested distribution check . watch out for dead cat bounce in stocks because there more pain ahead morgan stanley wilson tesla shares tsla . traded as high as . their highest since oct . and were the second best performer on the nasdaq . the stock market faces unlimited downside risk warns veteran trader select stocks be now coming into buy zones . the stocks that come into the buy zones may be accumulated by slowly scaling in . in contrast other marijuana stocks should be sold and even sold short betting on a decline . trump hits saudis over khashoggi death since there was no momo crowd buying selling from smart money initially drove marijuana stocks down but not by a lot . then the momo crowd panicked and started aggressively selling . with both momo crowd and smart money selling there were several technical breakdowns . a lot of money be tied to technical trading on wall street . such money started selling on technical breakdowns making the drop worse. here be the full list. get the top tech stories of the day delivered to your inbox . subscribe to marketwatch free tech daily newsletter . sign up here. read big drops for amd and nvidia fuel death cross for chip sector ahead of earnings the contrasting views from the two market observers underscore the conflicting factors driving the market with fears about higher interest rates and unresolved trade friction offset by relatively solid earnings and a robust economy. a self certification waiver based on institutional error be most likely to be granted when the following conditions exist some in the houston crowd as evidenced in the video below did the next best thing responding with a u.s.a. chant. puerto rico accusation hong kong the world longest sea bridge opened tuesday snaking miles across china pearl river estuary to form a pillar of beijing plan to merge cities in its southern region into one megalopolis. indeed china gross domestic product grew . from a year earlier in the third quarter down from . growth in the third quarter representing china slowest pace of economic expansion in almost a decade. oil futures dropped more than tuesday with u.s . benchmark prices at their lowest finish in about two months. trump signed a water infrastructure bill in an oval office ceremony after speaking to local elected officials from alaska california and hawaii . the measure authorizes the u.s . army corps of engineers to construct or modify more than water resource projects. do not miss china wto entry cost the u.s . . million jobs new study concludes providing critical information for the u.s . trading day . subscribe to marketwatch free need to know newsletter . sign up here. estate beneficiaries of the reit shares should enjoy a step up in basis on the value of the reit shares thus permanently eliminating federal capital gains taxes on both the sale of the original property and future appreciation of the reit shares wolanin added . if you want to go this route one caveat not all reits will accept irs code section so your options may be more limited . consult a tax and real estate attorney as the irs requests very specific language. do you have questions about inheritance tipping weddings family feuds friends or any tricky issues relating to manners and money send them to marketwatch moneyist and please include the state where you live no full names will be used . i have been getting a lot of emails from marijuana investors who be trying to understand the real reason behind share prices falling off a cliff . it be never easy for investors when the stocks they be holding fall precipitously. dan moisand comments be for informational purposes only and be not a substitute for personalized advice . consult your adviser about what be best for you . some questions be edited for brevity. it also the best time of year to put your money into the stock market. the report says the population would be worse off even if new taxes replace the cost of premiums paid to private sector insurers since taxation distorts economic activity and therefore the cost of tax revenues be larger than the revenues themselves. the white house report also said existing medicare recipients would likely stand to be hurt by such a program . the evidence for a trade off between universal and senior healthcare be supported by both the european single payer experience that limits care for the elderly compared with the u.s . as well as the recent domestic u.s . reforms in terms of the aca that cut medicare spending by billion to help fund expansions for younger age groups the report said. new management and a commitment to rein in costs should help the story but the biggest catalyst would be a return to daily active user growth which we believe will happen when the newer lightweight and faster android app be rolled out wrote barclays analyst ross sandler who has an overweight rating and price target on the stock. dear poor parent because of its industrial use the metal be often referenced as a leading economic indicator and recent declines have been attributed to signs of cracks in china economy which market experts say have been amplified by beijing trade clash with the u.s. you could cut the price tag a little further just by saying you will send rebate checks to everyone making under . that would cost billion for one year using jct estimates for the number of taxpayer units. it a model whose time has come said ben harris formerly the chief economist to vice president joe biden and now a lecturer at the kellogg school of management who written quite a bit about real estate market inefficiencies . in a research paper for example harris demonstrated that for anyone selling a home that had been owned for four years or less the transaction costs were the biggest expense associated with homeownership. marijuana beverages be the new thing but investors should only take sips do not miss awkward questions for your financial adviser also read the housing market slowdown be going to kill the home renovation boom too in terms of bear markets the sox index be marching toward one now that it be more than off its high of . set on march . a bear market be generally defined as when a security or index falls more than from a recent peak. stock movement snap shares have declined more than so far this year as the s p spx .  has gained . . read the stock market faces unlimited downside risk warns veteran trader rex also differs from showpal in that it uber izes in rothman words the showing process. as the researchers wrote to us this suggests at least in boston you can not tell the value of a home by its exterior but our point estimates do also imply that better appearance significantly increases price. torstenson has little patience for those arguments . in many cases gosh it would just be cheaper to also hire a therapist he said when asked about the hand holding many real estate agents do for skittish clients. japan nikkei index nik .  tumbled . and the hong kong hang seng index hsi .  dropped . in line with the retreat in china. smart money flows be extremely negative in tilray tlry . and marijuana etf mj . lund acknowledges that the built in advantages to that closed system only persist as long as the current state of play does . if disruptors like showpal and rex – and other innovations like companies that buy homes from consumers – gain a foothold the mls monopoly may be shaken. and finally parets took a look at what dow theory be telling us. this idea here be that when either industrial or transportation stocks make new highs it important for the other to follow . when that confirmation does not come there cause for concern. following the sale of costa whitbread will be a focused hotel businesses in the uk the middle east and germany which be shifting from independent hotels to branded hotels and could become a bigger focus for whitbread in the future. but trump has repeatedly characterized his new proposal as being for middle income taxpayers . so perhaps upper income taxpayers be excluded even though such a restriction does not seem characteristic of the trump administration. also see i lived in fear of rogue advisers and dementia but i changed my financial plan my medication and my life both michael piston and susan fortino brown who represented carreira in the underlying proceedings said they have been seeing the decision quality on employment based visas deteriorate since trump april buy american and hire american executive order. want news about asia delivered to your inbox subscribe to marketwatch free asia daily newsletter . sign up here. however one item in favor of the ira be a desire to convert pretax money to roth accounts . not all k s allow conversions to roth k s . further if you have never had a roth ira converting ira money starts the five year clock for making earnings tax free upon distribution . also roth iras be not subject to required minimum distributions at age but roth k accounts are. shares of pultegroup inc . phm . surged . in midday trade to bounce off the previous session month low after the home builder reported third quarter earnings that beat expectations although sales came up a bit shy . in the post earnings conference call chief executive ryan marshall said that while increasing volume of consumer traffic suggest home buying interest remains high the company wide absorption pace was down suggesting affordability resulting from higher interest rates and home prices be becoming a bigger hurdle for buyers to overcome according to a transcript provided by factset . adjustments the company said it can make within its communities to increase affordability include incentives related to home option packages and financing incentives . and then of course the easiest thing potentially to do and sometimes the most painful from a profitability standpoint be just absolute base price adjustments marshall said . and we tend to go there last be the kind of the order of magnitude of change that we would typically make. . early retirees be not withdrawing from life . they be embracing a purposeful life more fully than ever. as background i grew up with the same trust amounts and when i reached about was finally given control of my money and i only had . i am sure that my dad spent my money on my upkeep possibly even made me pay for my own boarding school . we really cannot afford for to pay for culturally enriching stuff. read more here how much tesla lost in market cap now that musk sec settlement be approved musk has vowed to show profits in the third and fourth quarters. and then take tweets about the stock market from the president from elon musk the former chief executive officer of auto maker tesla tsla .  who tweeted about taking the company private and caused chaos or from anyone else with skepticism . reach out to someone who you can figure out your personal situation with but do not make rash or emotional decisions based on what you read on social media geifer said. the words we choose when describing someone performance in the workplace matter they can have a profound impact on their career. but the evidence left the decider cold. the broad sector selloff comes despite early indications of strong demand since full legalization. at present the eu imposes a tariff on imported u.s . cars while the u.s . tacks on a . tariff on passenger cars made in europe and a tariff on imported pickup trucks. puzzles . defying gravity . unexplained phenomenon . halloween. lund predicts a single digit percentage of consumers will flock to the graduated services model of companies like showpal and rex but the majority be going to continue to do it the way they do it because it works . there a lot that local real estate agents do that do not show up in economic calculations. americans with k plans should not run to their plan administrator to change their contribution rates or asset allocations advisers said . if you be someone working and saving in a k plan your long term savings strategies wo not be materially impacted by who won the midterm elections in geifer said . focus your energy elsewhere on things you can control. read your financial adviser sleep easy portfolio may be riskier than you think the couple spent several weeks trying to get their home listed on zillow a process fischer called a bit of a mess. showpal saw the zillow ad and reached out to fischer. last week a federal judge approved musk settlement with the sec reached last month to end charges that musk misled investors and violated securities laws by tweeting he had funding secured to take tesla private . musk and tesla agreed to the settlement without admitting or denying the allegations. it seems as though there be an interest in finding a way to deny these petitions she added . in my practice this has regrettable become more and more common under the trump administration. as more advisers charge based on the time they spend serving clients such as an hourly rate or a monthly or quarterly retainer the assets under management fee structure will fade veres predicts . he favors this shift arguing that charging a percentage of assets be not a sustainable business model. read here be the early signs china stock market woes be starting to infect the rest of the world citron note comes after the silicon valley car maker announced late monday that it will report third quarter results on wednesday much sooner than anticipated. another newish player rex offers what it calls a full service low fee approach . the amount any seller pays be always and if a buyer wants to work with his or her own agent that professional must accept those terms . as an alternative to that uncomfortable conversation the los angeles based rex will provide one of its own on staff salaried brokers to any buyer . we never ask anyone to go without representation rex spokesman eric rothman said . rex has been around since and be currently raising a series c round of funding. also read all the potential red flags for investors in igc the pot stock that jumped in three months. tesla shares have lost this year and in the last months . that compares with gains of . and . for the s p index spx .  and the dow jones industrial average djia .  in the same period. the president previous tweets on k plans have taken credit for how well the stock market be doing since he was elected which translates to greater returns in retirement accounts . his recent tweet on k plans suggests something along the lines of if you elect someone else who be not embracing my philosophies and programs it will hurt your pocket book’ said dennis nolte vice president of seacoast investment services in winter park fla. chris matthews and barbara kollmeyer contributed to this article you could also refinance the property and take that money and invest it elsewhere . bottom line these be all good questions . my gut tells me you that you be absolutely right to question what you should do with this rental and as you turn there no better time to shake up your financial situation and ask tough questions . but maybe be not the year to do it. despite the long losing streak the horizons etf was still up over the past three months and the etfmg etf was up while the s p indexspx . has lost . . chinese e commerce giant alibaba group holding limited has won a preliminary injunction against cryptocurrency firm alibabacoin foundation. one of my close friends be working with an executive coach who be helping her get to the next level . her performance reviews generally indicate that she be on track for a promotion . but when one of the male execs on her panel gave her the feedback that she be aggressive and recommended that she be less aggressive her morale was shaken. now read the real reason marijuana stocks be falling off a cliff and what to do now the bigger question longer term will be whether the uk really needs so many more hotels analysts at aj bell said . the industry continues to build and build plus there be the additional factor of airbnb offering plentiful supply of accommodation they added. present day socialists do not want the dictatorship or state brutality that often coincided with the most extreme cases of socialism the report said . however peaceful democratic implementation of socialist policies does not eliminate the fundamental incentive and information problems created by high tax rates large state organizations and the centralized control of resources. smart money flows be neutral in green organic dutchman holdings tgodf . this article be reprinted by permission from nextavenue.org . it be adapted from the book  nevertheless she persisted true stories of women leaders in tech  by pratima rao gluckman. reprinted with permission of the author. as the company bolsters its self serve offering continues to innovate on the snapchat pixel and adds more dynamic advertising use cases and ad formats we believe pricing will begin to stabilize on a year over year basis in he wrote. citron acknowledged its long held bearish view on tesla and its surprising turn as much as you can not believe you be reading this we can not believe we be writing this collaborative planning means that you start with a thorough multiple meeting conversation about your clients goals what money means to them what they be saving for and then helping them refine those goals said veres author of the new profession. the president took to twitter to defend tariffs as being great for negotiations and as leverage for what he called fair trade deals. naturally the past be not a guarantee of the future. last week a federal judge approved musk settlement with the sec reached last month to end charges that musk misled investors and violated securities laws by tweeting he had funding secured to take tesla private . musk and tesla agreed to the settlement without admitting or denying the allegations. the cryptocurrency alibabacoin or abbc has a market value of . million and be trading at cents according to data from coinmarketcap . the coin had reached an all time high of . on oct . . meanwhile alibaba boasts a market value of more than billion. tesla scheduled a post results call with analysts at p.m . pacific about one hour later than usual . ford motor co . be also scheduled to report after the bell on wednesday. if you be self certifying that you be eligible for a waiver because of illness you should be able to demonstrate two things first you need to show that the medical issue impaired your ability to complete a timely rollover and next you need to show the funds were not used for personal reasons in the intervening time. the company noted in its report that its own spending on facebook ads topped million in may through october as it pushed a message about how it strengthening security during elections. that per year seems like an endless well of ballet or gymnastic classes or summer camps with other young girls born of wealthy parents with double barreled names . who knows she could be the next misty copeland or simone biles . you can pay for these things and hope that all of these extra curricular activities instill in her the expectation and confidence that perhaps you did not have at that age . it a luxury to take things for granted especially when you be young. wedbush analyst michael pachter thinks that a more self aware company can emerge at snap. get a daily roundup of the top reads in personal finance delivered to your inbox . subscribe to marketwatch free personal finance daily newsletter . sign up here. combined these two would add basis points to the average global import tariff essentially reversing about years of progress in global tariff reduction said ubs chief economist arend kapteyn and his colleagues in a recent note. christina carreira be one half of a team that lit the ice on fire . she and her partner anthony ponomarenko be the world top junior ice dance team and have racked up medals including four gold medals in international competition since . she currently in the country legally on a visa that allows her to train here temporarily. opinion why ted cruz will defeat beto o’rourke in their texas senate meanwhile the horizons marijuana etf was still up over the past three months and the etfmg etf was up while the s p indexspx . has slipped . . indeed high grade copper hgz . widely used as an industrial metal in manufacturing buildings and electronics at . a pound on tuesday be down . on the year and about . so far in october . the metal be on track to register losses in five of the past six months and seven of the past nine. tension has been escalating between the republican and democratic parties in light of supreme court justice brett kavanaugh confirmation to the court as well as immigration health care and other social issues. the working paper computer vision and real estate do looks matter and do incentives determine looks was based on research by noted housing scholar and urbanist ed glaeser of harvard university and two associates. capitol report new white house report echoes trump campaign rallies in attacking socialism crude oil has been declining on concerns over excessive supply in the months ahead with the risk off tone stemming from the equity markets also not helping the cause said fawad razaqzada technical analyst at forex.com. tesla shares tsla . traded as high as . their highest since oct . and were the second best performer on the nasdaq . if you have a question for dan please email him with marketwatch q a on the subject line. i think there be retiring forward and retiring backward . suze did what many early retirees do . she left her day job . she got rid of excess not needed in a post job life . for most it getting rid of the car to impress clients or five suits for a weekly rotation at the office . for suze it was five cars and five homes. now read the real reason marijuana stocks be falling off a cliff and what to do now there be not a readily available breakdown of the cbo forecast by income bracket the cbo said it does not have that information so for argument sake a joint committee on taxation breakdown on the distribution effects of the tax cuts and jobs act will be used . that not a perfect solution since the jct breakdown includes more than just income taxes. the issue lately be that while there have been pockets of positive action around each day has had its culprits . on monday the financials big drop diluted the market attempt to bounce . on tuesday the s p was able to mount a substantial turn around but this time energy was the obvious laggard he said . so today breach of the lows could end up marking a key trading low but i think the price action shows that the trading environment remains fragile and stocks are easily pushed around. meanwhile warren buffett once said that wall street analysts make fortune tellers look good. so while in salem i stopped by one of the town psychics to see if he could tell me where the stock market was headed . i have been following people on wall street for twenty years and none of them has a clue. he pointed to several divergences that should make clear to investors just how precarious the market situation be at these current levels . the first one be what we be seeing in this chart of the s p vs . the rest of the world. but plain and simple tesla be destroying the competition it said . it looks like it be the competition that be taking the ambien referring to musk admission that he sometimes uses the sleeping pill. read more here how much tesla lost in market cap now that musk sec settlement be approved there be a broader implication to this discussion . because the aggressive label does not just come up in informal discussions but also appears in performance reviews it can have a major impact on careers. this be not the first doctor to effectively recommend walking your way to a longer life . walking at an average pace was linked to a reduction in the risk of mortality compared with walking at a slow pace according to a study published earlier this year in the british journal of sports medicine . a similar result was found for risk of dying from cardiovascular disease. fears that a slowdown by china economy will eventually ripple through the rest of the world were playing out on tuesday reflected in a sweeping global equity market downturn. those efforts come as the beijing and the u.s . remain locked in a trade dispute that many analysts feel be reverberating through china and u.s . markets . underperformance of cyclical sectors relative to their defensive peers around the world since global equities started to fall back last month likely reflects investor worries about the growth outlook for both china and the u.s . wrote economists at capital economics. when it comes to raking in mailbox money residents of some cities be doing better than others . in some cases much much better. pot stocks fall again as aurora cannabis sinks on nyse debut the puritans tried to burn the witches out of salem but their stunt had the opposite effect . thanks to the publicity the place be now witch central . occult stores and magic shops crowd the victorian town narrow side streets selling artifacts crystals mysterious powders and books on tarot cards. among the more active stocks aurora cannabis inc.acb . acb . made its debut on the new york stock exchange moving over from the otc markets . the reception was not too festive however as the stock dropped . . trading volume was heavy at . million shares enough to make it the seventh most active stock on the nyse. i can not tell you to sell or not . you have no doubt seen the wild ride the dow jones industrial djia .  and s p spx .   has had over the last few weeks. you have some evidence e.g . documents or behavior that backs up your story providing critical information for the u.s . trading day . subscribe to marketwatch free need to know newsletter . sign up here. my sister be on disability so eventually we will need to sell my mother assets to give her money to live on . once my mom dementia got worse i did become a co trustee with financial power of attorney. perhaps predictably one key trump ally was said to be delighted with the president word choice i be telling you i just did it for three years on my private island . i retired at . i shut down the suze orman show . i sold five homes . i got rid of five cars . i stopped going on qvc . i stopped writing for oprah magazine . i stopped giving talks . i stopped doing everything and i had a great time for three years . i learned how to fish . i learned how to win tournaments . i learned how to be the captain on my boat . and all of a sudden it was like oh there still stuff for me to do. now . i was in a field that everybody welcomed me back when i came back . they were excited to see me in the halls of nbc and msnbc and everywhere that i went this past week. if someone misses the deadline for a legitimate reason however there be wiggle room available because the irs allows them to self certify their eligibility for an extension . let take a closer look at the options available to complete a valid rollover after the day period has expired. social media peer twitter inc . twtr .  struggled for years but it began to earn wall street respect when it posted its first profitable quarter in february . the company still has user growth issues but it doing a better job of monetizing the existing user base and selling higher quality ads. and sooner or later that sort of double dealing tends to catch up. in may nestle nesn . the world largest food and drinks group paid starbucks corpsbux .   . billion to sell its coffee products such as nespresso after activist investor dan loeb pressured the company to boost its margins. heart patients spend most of their waking hours sitting lying down but remaining sedentary for long periods could shorten their life research suggests . taking breaks and burning more than calories per day should help prolong their life said ailar ramadi postdoctoral fellow in the faculty of rehabilitation medicine at university of alberta edmonton and author of the latest paper. compare that kind of price tag with the estimated billion cost of a trump border wall that has gotten nowhere in congress . legislation proposed by house majority leader kevin mccarthy would provide a slightly slimmer . billion. he may be right . he may not . but he raised some sound questions . be you prepared in your life to take on more risk do you have the information you need do you understand what you control and what you don’t these reasonable thoughts cost me . i thought that was pretty good . but then i have been hanging around wall street witch doctors for too long. tesla surprised markets on monday by setting the date for its third quarter results about two weeks earlier than its usual date . tesla did not return a request for comment from marketwatch late monday about the decision to fast forward earnings with little notice. see also marijuana stocks to watch aurora cannabis investments may be more valuable than its pot. the links be part of a plan to create an integrated region that officials have dubbed the greater bay area. the bridge will put hong kong macau and the chinese city of zhuhai within an hour of each other . emphasizing the importance of the project president xi jinping was the guest of honor at the official opening tuesday declaring the bridge open after speeches from senior officials from the cities heralding a new milestone in their partnership. with stores in countries costa be the second largest coffee shop in the world after starbucks.the deal allows coca cola inc . ko .  to diversify away from fizzy and sugary drinks and expand into healthier offerings . costa be aiming to triple its store presence in china. the trump make america great again committee a group backing president donald trump comes in second behind o’rourke having spent . million on facebook ads from may through october. shares of canopy growth corp.cgc . weed . slumped cronos group inc.cron . dropped new age beverages corp.nbev . plunged and tilray inc.tlry . lost . trending at wsj.com smart money flows be negative in aphria aphqf . cronos cron . neptune nept . and new age beverages nbev . dear moneyist corona beer maker constellation brands inc.stz . which made a splash when it boosted its stake in canopy growth by billion in august saw its shares lose . . and then a couple of years in more or less the identity confrontation lands with a thud . who am i now that i am not my job how do i explain myself to others how can i gain the respect and voice i had with my old job i was somebody . now i be nobody. the best way for me to get insight into his thinking be to ask another adviser . it seems out of line or maybe not the most prudent thing to do to invest in year bonds for a woman in her s says joe mclean managing partner of intersect capital in san ramon calif . one possible answer be that the adviser thought the investments would roll to the beneficiaries and the bonds would not have to be sold . i would think this would involve a discussion with the beneficiaries. coincident with the th anniversary of karl marx birth socialism be making a comeback in american political discourse the report from the white house council of economic advisers said . detailed policy proposals from self declared socialists be gaining support in congress and among much of the electorate said the report . it titled the opportunity costs of socialism. the researchers analyzed several thousand homes sold in boston between and using assessor data and images from google street view as well as some interior photography from zillowzg .   . to that data the researchers applied standard computer vision techniques using machine learning to assess images. opinion snap and tesla be for sale and here who will buy them the dow jones industrial average djia .  fell . or . to . after being down more than points earlier . the s p spx .  shed . points or . to . while the nasdaq composite index comp . slid . points or . to . . second we keep talking about a waiver . it be technically not a waiver of the day rule but the rollover will be valid anyway tomayto tomahto . unlike most people who buy or sell a home feel bruised by the steep transaction costs and then walk away vowing never to move again torstenson decided to do something about it . torstenson be an emergency room doctor – a profession where it fair to say inefficiencies and participants who do not pull their weight be not tolerated. alas he not allowed to answer financial questions . that an illegal question he said when i asked him where the stock market was heading . no one around here will answer a money question . it against the city ordinances. the equity research team found that for every percentage point change in real new auto consumer price index cpi and in the rate of unemployment u.s . light vehicle demand varied on average by around and annual units respectively since . a. phil to avoid taxation the money needs to stay in a k or an ira and any rollover needs to be done properly . so i would say no to any nonretirement accounts. the publication of the white house report drew sharp criticism when you consider everything that be happening right now italy brexit saudi arabia a chinese growth slowdown trade wars the pending u.s . midterm elections and i could go on almost all the news we see every day be bad . the surprise be not that markets be reacting it be that markets did not react sooner and that they have not reacted harder wrote brad mcmillan chief investment officer at commonwealth financial network in a note . we can expect more volatility . but with strong economic fundamentals in place it be reasonable to conclude that this turbulence be probably just another or i.e . a sharp pullback that will be reversed in the next couple of months. last week the treasury department reported a billion deficit for the fiscal year ending sept . up billion. the walt disney co . dis . top animation executive pixar co founder ed catmull will retire from the company at the end of the year disney announced tuesday afternoon . catmull will remain as an advisor through july which will mark years in the industry after he started out at lucasfilm before cofounding pixar with help from apple inc . aapl . co founder steve jobs . i have the mixed emotions that come with stepping away from a group of people i love but also with the utmost pride and pleasure that we now have at both pixar and disney animation the most dedicated and imaginative leaders i have worked with catmull said in tuesday release . disney said it would not replace catmull with a new president overseeing its two main animation studios pixar and walt disney instead having the two heads of those studios report to walt disney studios president alan bergman . disney shares were trading down . in late trading tuesday after closing with a . decline at . . rex goal be for a market share of homes and up in the top markets in the u.s . according to rothman . with only five closings under his belt since starting up in may torstenson still aims high he believes showpal can garner of the business in any metro market within months of launching there . the company be about to launch a series a round of funding. india globalization capital inc . stockigc . had plunged as much as intraday before bouncing to rally in afternoon trade but has still lost over the past six sessions . read more about the red flags for igc investors. get a daily roundup of the top reads in personal finance delivered to your inbox . subscribe to marketwatch free personal finance daily newsletter . sign up here. as for the other factors which the researchers classified as incentives some may be surprising . homes that were foreclosed upon lost about of their visually observable value relative to homes that had not undergone foreclosure . these estimated effects be far lower than some estimates of the social cost of foreclosure but still significant both economically and statistically they say. providing critical information for the u.s . trading day . subscribe to marketwatch free need to know newsletter . sign up here. showpal model be a graduated services approach . for homeowners get an appraisal and market analysis a photo shoot a yard sign a listing on zillow and trulia and the services of an attorney for closing documentation . for a few hundred more sellers also get what might be the company secret sauce a security service that allows interested buyers in for private showings or open houses . and the ultimate package gets the listing on the multiple listing service the industry controlled database of housing inventory for sale. an important pointer for investors to carefully make millions in marijuana stocks be to learn how to properly size their positions and how to build the position sizes correctly. a separate harvard university study concluded that you could add years to your life by eating a healthy diet exercising minutes or more a day maintaining a healthy weight a body mass index between . and . never smoking and drinking only a moderate amount of alcohol . it analyzed years of data from women and years of data from men. united technologies corp . utx .  reversed earlier losses to add . after the firm beat third quarter profit and sales expectations. get a daily roundup of the top reads in personal finance delivered to your inbox . subscribe to marketwatch free personal finance daily newsletter . sign up here. while iran continues to express doubts about the ability of other oil producers to compensate for the shortfall in iranian oil exports data showing a reduction in speculative long positions and the negative price action indicate that the market be not nearly as nervous as it was just a few weeks ago they said. when a woman speaks her mind and be assertive she be likely to be labeled as aggressive . so be these women confronting and attacking their colleagues or be they simply being effective leaders on joint safety we were hoping to see a little bit better balance between tanezumab and placebo verburg told marketwatch noting that rapidly progressive osteoarthritis was only seen in the tanezumab patient groups . still the numbers be small and one or two events from one treatment group to another could have changed the picture substantially. the key level to watch by his reckoning be . in that case the judge would deem the inheritance as separate property . there be many divorce cases in ohio that have quoted this salient piece of the law the commingling of separate property with other property of any type does not destroy the identity of the separate property as separate property except when the separate property be not traceable. so proceed with caution if you intend on staying in a marriage for financial reasons particularly if it be an unhappy one. the drug could be a significant multibillion dollar market opportunity if potential safety issues be addressed j.p . morgan analyst chris schott said late last month referring to several ongoing phase trials. we do not think the correction be done yet . we think attempts to rebound were more short lived than sustainable . recent price declines in crowded growth tech and discretionary have caused enough portfolio pain that we think most investors be playing with weak hands he said. he was not referring to how the nov . election itself will affect the stock market and thus retirement accounts . the market be cyclical and often reacts to elections whether presidential or not . trump was suggesting that voting democrats into congress would have a negative impact on the future of these retirement plans such as changes to his recent tax law and economic policies . it a political move to elicit an emotional response said mike geifer a wealthcare adviser at the johnston group in minneapolis . it to drum up his voter base and nothing more than that. this be not the first doctor to effectively recommend walking your way to a longer life . walking at an average pace was linked to a reduction in the risk of mortality compared with walking at a slow pace according to a study published earlier this year in the british journal of sports medicine . a similar result was found for risk of dying from cardiovascular disease. most people realize that funds rolled over within days will avoid unwelcome tax consequences. shares of caterpillar inc.cat .  fell . after the industrial giant reported profits and revenue ahead of analysts expectations but offered guidance that was below consensus. chinese stocks fell hard last week then staged the sharpest two day recovery since buoyed as government officials attempted to soothe investors . but those reassurances gave way to renewed worries about china economic health and the continued trade battle between washington and beijing with shanghai falling . on tuesday and shenzhen ending . lower. elsewhere medmen enterprises inc . sharesmmnff . lost after the full service cannabis company said it acquired a dispensary in san jose calif . for an undisclosed sum . the news follows the company announcement earlier this month of a million buyout of pharmcann to mark the biggest ever deal for a u.s. based marijuana company. what could hurt marijuana stocks too much love from investors from suze account it sounds like she retired backward into her old role . ok . but what did she learn in those hiatus years that she can share with her audience it seems from other comments she learned that even million in a retirement account be not enough . that stuff happens and money be the answer . i hope for all our sakes that she learned more than that and will share it. citron note comes after the silicon valley car maker announced late monday that it will report third quarter results on wednesday much sooner than anticipated. medmen continues to expand its market share in california the largest and most advanced cannabis market in the world said chief executive adam bierman . our next phase of growth will be focused on going deeper in the markets where we already have a presence and brand equity. from suze account it sounds like she retired backward into her old role . ok . but what did she learn in those hiatus years that she can share with her audience it seems from other comments she learned that even million in a retirement account be not enough . that stuff happens and money be the answer . i hope for all our sakes that she learned more than that and will share it. according to the company linkedin page alibabacoin foundation blockchain technology will use artificial intelligence techniques effective for image recognition most reliably to identify a person most accurately as possible and use this technique effectively for the structure of payment of electronic wallets and financial transactions. marijuana stocks fall in worst ever day for the sector you be debt free and barring any financial catastrophes you be gliding nicely towards retirement . your investments be diversified stocks bonds and property . a financial adviser can take a closer look at your assets to determine whether based on the value of each this be a smart and comfortable arrangement for someone in your age group . you should be happy with your investment risks regarding your various retirement accounts and property investments. as investors backed away from perceived riskier assets such as stocks they sought a haven in the japanese yenusdjpy . gold prices gcz . settled higher while oil futures us clx  slumped. it be hard to imagine anyone leading effectively without being assertive. at the arora report we address marijuana every day before the market opens in the morning capsule . from the morning capsule we have been sharing with you that marijuana stocks be high beta stocks . in plain english this means that they move a lot . the momo momentum crowd be aggressively selling marijuana stocks . overall smart money flows be negative but on down spikes there be light buying from smart money in select marijuana stocks. let give further credit for a presumed boost to economic expansion from the additional tax cuts . tax rebates were tried in and though the evidence from those programs was that the rebates were used for debt reduction rather than new spending. americans have their eyes on the midterm elections this november more so than in recent years . nearly two thirds of registered voters showed interest in the midterm election coming up according to a wall street journal nbc poll the highest recorded since the first poll of its kind in . mcdonald corp . mcd .  led dow advancers rising . after announcing third quarter results. also see november shock republicans could still control congress after the midterms poll suggest mr . money mustache did an excellent job of correcting her misimpressions of what we all be up to with saving and investing money early in life so we can be free to pursue what matters more than money . i do not have anything to add to his explanation. the national association of realtors the mighty washington lobby boasting . million members across the country declined to comment for this story . an industry group called the accredited seller agency council did not respond to requests for comment. fawad razaqzada technical analyst at research and trading platform forex.com told marketwatch that he already be seeing signs of contagion in the commodity complex from the second largest economy in the world and a big importer of metals crude oil and other raw materials. and then a couple of years in more or less the identity confrontation lands with a thud . who am i now that i am not my job how do i explain myself to others how can i gain the respect and voice i had with my old job i was somebody . now i be nobody. green organic dutchman holdings ltd . stocktgodf . declined . and new age beverages corp . sharesnbev . tacked on . . net element inc . stocknete . tumbled after running up on monday as it launched a compliant payment processing offering for the legal cannabis industry. richard hilgert senior equity analyst at morningstar said if international trade conflict heats up our forecast would need to be adjusted depending on the tariffs implemented . we included the assumption that the u.s . economy would gradually cool reducing our forecast to about . million light vehicle sales volume in before a mild recovery in and . shares of net element inc.nete . were a rare highlight for bulls as they shot up on heavy volume after the florida based financial technology company said its unified payments subsidiary launched a secure and compliant payment processing offering for the legal cannabis industry . trading volume spiked to . million shares compared with the full day average of about shares. have breaking news sent to your inbox . subscribe to marketwatch free bulletin emails . sign up here. he suggests simple activities such as standing up and walking at a casual pace . there be a lot of evidence now that sitting for long periods be bad for health ramadi said . his study enrolled patients with coronary artery disease and an average age of years were men . participants wore an arm band activity monitor for an average of hours a day for five days. trump said saudi arabia handling of the death of reporter jamal khashoggi was one of the worst cover ups in the history of cover ups but continued to defend u.s . arms sales to the middle eastern nation . saudi arabia has said khashoggi died accidentally in a brawl in its consulate in istanbul but turkish officials says he was killed in an operation planned by saudi officials. another divergence we have not seen since the top and before that the top be the relationship between consumer staples and the broader market. the sector continues to lose ground since adult recreational marijuana use became fully legal in canada on oct . . in the two months leading up to full legalization the cannabis etf had soared . you never expect snap to close the gap but that gives you an idea of how much room there be to narrow the gap he told marketwatch in an interview. read millennials have more money than you think so expect esg funds in your k today seemed like a microcosm of october two way volatility sharp moves and acute turns which ultimately left both sides of the tape yearning for more by the close said frank capelleri executive director of equity sales and trading at instinet llc. on twitter the short seller also said that the early earnings might be a bad sign for shorts. while this increases the overall risk to our estimates we would rather see snap ship a fully vetted product wrote ju who has an outperform rating on the stock but cut his target to from . read dow plunges amid corporate outlook china selloff using official data the ubs analysts estimated the amount of shares pledged for collateral at . trillion renminbi . billion equal to around of total market cap . around billion to billion renminbi worth of collateral be near the forced liquidation line which they said normally be a collateral coverage ratio of . that equal to around of overall a share market cap or of the free float. with the press of a button the home was online and buyers began touring the home torstenson said . however my listing agent was not giving the tours the buyer agents were . after the home sold i realized that my agent did very little to earn his share of the commission he said. h b visa applications have been dropping . the federal government admits about immigrants under the program . around the executive order signing administration officials said they received applications during that fiscal year reduced from the applications received the year earlier. that not something facebook and google goog . googl .  are really doing he said . terry be upbeat on snap stock he rates the shares at buy with an price target but cautioned that twitter worked on its issues for about two year before it started seeing a payoff in its stock price . snap be in about month of its journey he said. overall the monthly observations over years show a strong halloween effect write cherry yi zhang assistant professor in finance at nottingham university business school in china and ben jacobsen professor of finance at the tias school of business and society in the netherlands . and it not minor either. if you remove all the taxpayers reporting more than in income you cut out basically half the tax base . so since these be back of the envelope numbers anyway let cut half of the price tag making it now billion for one year or . trillion over a decade. hello there marketwatchers . check out the moneyist facebook group where we look for answers to life thorniest money issues . readers write in to me with all sorts of dilemmas inheritance wills divorce tipping gifting . i often talk to lawyers accountants financial advisers and other experts in addition to offering my own thoughts . i receive more letters than i could ever answer so i will be bringing all of that guidance including some you might not see in these columns to this group . post your questions tell me what you want to know more about or weigh in on the latest moneyist columns. though sandler be upbeat about the stock over the medium term he thinks consensus expectations for million daily active users be too optimistic . the trajectory of snap dau has been in decline since the redesign and we have yet to see signs of stabilization sandler wrote. even a so called blue wave in which democrats would capture control of both the house and the senate would leave them short of a veto proof majority according to election forecasting models to get legislation through trump without his consent. and as the bull market more popular stocks finally succumb to the rolling bear market wilson cast doubt on whether investors will able to count on the so called santa rally a strong surge in stock prices that has become almost a tradition at the end of the year. west texas intermediate crude for december delivery clz .  on the new york mercantile exchange fell . or . to settle at . a barrel . that was the lowest settlement since aug . . december brent crude lcoz . the global benchmark was off . or nearly . to . a barrel on the ice futures europe exchange for the lowest finish since late august. fiers might travel to exotic places . for some it backpacking . for suze it was living on her private island. trump at campaign rallies has been saying that democrats will turn the u.s . into venezuela if they take power. given the high degree of cyclicality in both tech and consumer discretionary we think their derating should be more in line with the broader s p or another he said. others be less certain that snap can pull off a rebound . although twitter pulled off a similar miracle call us skeptical as despite the memo we do not have faith in snap leadership to navigate these rapids moffettnathanson michael nathanson wrote in a recent report . nathanson has a neutral rating and . target on the shares. news corp nws .   owner of marketwatch operates realtor.com under license from the national association of realtors. divergence between the performance of u.s . stocks and rest of the world also has been cited as evidence to support the notion that china woes be infecting global markets outside of the u.s. as investors backed away from perceived riskier assets such as stocks they sought a haven in the japanese yenusdjpy . gold prices gcz . settled higher while oil futures us clx  slumped. do you have questions about inheritance tipping weddings family feuds friends or any tricky issues relating to manners and money send them to marketwatch moneyist and please include the state where you live no full names will be used . tesla shares have lost this year and in the last months . that compares with gains of . and . for the s p index spx .  and the dow jones industrial average djia .  in the same period. i find this topic to be profoundly troubling. i paid for the duplex and spent about on updates and renovations . a real estate agent has suggested selling it for as a duplex or converting it to condominiums and selling each for . investors may want to take advantage of the technique we often use at the arora report to double returns and lower risks . in this technique core positions be built by scaling into select stocks in the buy zones for the longer term . then the long term positions be surrounded by short term trades in an opportunistic manner. citron acknowledged its long held bearish view on tesla and its surprising turn as much as you can not believe you be reading this we can not believe we be writing this fourth you can avoid any problems with the day issue by using a direct rollover or a trustee to trustee transfer . in many cases this be the best way to transfer funds anyway. president donald trump on tuesday called saudi arabia handling of the killing of a journalist one of the worst cover ups in history as he admitted he did not have proof that middle eastern criminals were in a migrant caravan and defended his use of tariffs against other nations. late tuesday trump speaking during a so called pool spray in the oval office said the term nationalist should be brought back but suggested he was unfamiliar with the reasons it heard so rarely in open public discourse. that said i can answer your question with some more questions . currently you be roughly getting a rate of return on your original investment on each unit or on both when taking into account your purchase price renovations and other annual costs . that not bad at all given that your property will likely continue to increase in value . that slightly more than the . rate of return you would receive if you had of your k account in stocks and in fixed income. pledged share collateral financing is not small with estimates ranging from billion to billion equal to to of total a share market cap wrote sean darby chief global equity strategist at jefferies in a note . a shares be stocks of chinese companies incorporated on the mainland and listed in shanghai and shenzhen. do not miss at a time of market volatility beware of rogue advisers who play on your fears attorneys representing both alibaba and alibabacoin foundation did not immediately return requests for comment. indeed the simple life be one of the lures of early retirement. read tech stocks that stand to close at new week lows among other signs o’hara pointed to the national association of active investment managers survey which showed that managers reduced their exposure to equities to last week . since a reading in the vicinity of has led to managers adding to their positions. coach carson posted a balanced informative response appreciating suze admonition to be sure you have enough for a risk free retirement . suze enumerated a string what can go wrong scenarios as evidence that early retirement on less than million leaves you vulnerable when life hands you lemons a whole tree of lemons . he and mmm responded evenhandedly but ultimately here what carson said she got wrong ask arora nigam arora answers your questions about investing in stocks etfs bonds gold and silver oil and currencies . have a question send it to nigam arora. djia . on monday dow industrials and the s p closed lower while the nasdaq bucked the trend to edge higher. do you have questions about inheritance tipping weddings family feuds friends or any tricky issues relating to manners and money send them to marketwatch moneyist and please include the state where you live no full names will be used . mr . money mustache did an excellent job of correcting her misimpressions of what we all be up to with saving and investing money early in life so we can be free to pursue what matters more than money . i do not have anything to add to his explanation. related white house kudlow says new tax cuts in planning stage’ should we use any of her money for her extra curricular activity for example summer camps which can range from a week to dance class gymnastics we have not done this . we be not rich people . in fact we be decidedly middle class . and i do not want her to miss out on things that i feel will benefit her as a person overall. trump threatens to cut foreign aid over migrant caravan progress the research also showed that of users consume it for recreational purposes while of users consume it for medical reasons . of the total said they use it for both purposes. to uncover your clients aspirations and goals you need to devote more time to getting to know them . and that means boosting your productivity so that you squeeze more value from every hour of the day. have breaking news sent to your inbox . subscribe to marketwatch free bulletin emails . sign up here. i offer up this juicy story in a california woman won . million in the lottery and filed for divorce days later . she did not tell her husband about her windfall and two years later her husband found out all about it and sued her . superior court judge richard denner ruled did not appreciate her shenanigans and awarded her husband all of her winnings . if a judge suspected you were planning to divorce when your husband made these payments your plan could also backfire . any good divorce lawyer would balk if he saw such payments prior to a divorce. read the stock market faces unlimited downside risk warns veteran trader even less heroic calculations including obscure and illiquid markets yielded returns of . for the six months following halloween and . a year for the other half of the year. do not miss advisers say most investors can breathe easy despite wildly unpredictable markets we do not think the value proposition of a realtor be zero . we think it approaching zero but it not zero yet torstenson added. the first pointer given in how to potentially become a marijuana millionaire albeit carefully be to expect these stocks to be very volatile . here be the second pointer investors may want to take advantage of the volatility by selling into the strength and buying into the weakness. heart patients should move around every minutes during an eight hour period of sitting according to a paper presented on saturday at the canadian cardiovascular congress in toronto an event where visiting experts from the european society of cardiology participate in joint scientific sessions with the canadian cardiovascular society. overall the shanghai composite has lost of its value since hitting a peak on jan . while the small capitalization focused shenzhen has declined by since its late january apex according to factset data . that means both benchmarks be deep in bear market territory defined as a drop of at least from a recent peak. poor parent with rich daughter regeneron pharmaceuticals inc . regn .  and teva pharmaceutical industries ltd . teva .  are also developing another one of this class of drugs called fasinumab which also targets a protein called nerve growth factor to reduce pain . the companies announced results from a phase trial in august and said they plan to advance the program. check out marketwatch package of tariff related stories i live in another state and think this broker got her in these bonds with the lure of a good rate around . but his paperwork shows nothing about commissions either . my sister who lives with my mom also trusts this man and never questioned what he was doing. an individual relies on the financial institution for either advice or services opinion the real reason marijuana stocks be falling off a cliff and what to do now so you must positioning yourself for that tasty bounce we have grown accustomed to over the course of this stubborn bull market . well do not warns j.c . parets the technical analyst behind the all star charts blog. so why did it come out on top the high percentage of retirees who live there likely pushed naples over the edge . some of the population be or older the u.s . census bureau found . florida be one of the five states with the highest median age population along with maine new hampshire vermont and west virginia. my year old mother has dementia . she has used a broker that she and my father basically inherited when their prior broker left the firm . she liked him very much and not being that smart financially i trusted him as well. this can mean time in nature reading meditation and family life . for many who achieve financial independence fi compensatory spending the shopping you do to reward yourself for a tough week at work disappears . for suze it was quitting the qvc habit. after eking out gains last week the s p spx .  is trading below the dma of thus far this week as stocks remain under pressure with third quarter earnings cycle picking up pace . both the blue chip dow jones industrial average djia .  and the nasdaq comp .  slumped and remain below their respective dmas . market technicians view moving averages as a dividing line of bullish and bearish momentum in an asset. get a hold of the summary plan description spd . it will tell you if the plan will accept rollovers . most plans do and you should be able to roll that money out at any time . the spd will also list out the investment options and the fees. all they have to do be get serious about monetization said pachter who rates the stock at outperform with a . price target and sees signs that the company be making the right early moves . snap fired its chief financial officer in may and has brought in what pachter describes as adult supervision in other areas of the company. u.s . stocks bounced off intraday lows and major indexes trimmed early losses tuesday but the s p still finished lower for a fifth session as a big drop in the chinese market revived fresh questions about the global economy. she said to paula dear moneyist should i sell the duplex and invest the sales proceeds or keep the property and continue to collect rent the recent market volatility has me wondering how i would invest the sales proceeds . the main question be whether i would get a better return by selling the duplex and investing the money or by keeping the property and collecting rent. my family has a trust fund . my daughter since the day she was born has received dividends . the average be about per year . she be years old . in order to be fiscally responsible we have set up an account with edward jones . her money be being directly sent there to put in an account . so far it be worth over . i think we be being pretty fiscally responsible. and although u.s . stocks ended well off their worst levels on tuesday fears that china may prove the catalyst that ultimately upends the global economy be lingering . that sentiment comes after the shanghai composite shcomp .  finished down . while the shenzhen composite index . closed . lower halting a two day rally that had been underpinned by market supportive comments from chinese officials. shares of caterpillar inc.cat .  fell . after the industrial giant reported profits and revenue ahead of analysts expectations but offered guidance that was below consensus. let the record show that salem mass . regulates the kind of advice fortune tellers be allowed to give more rigorously than the securities exchange commission regulates forecasters on wall street at least as far as stock market predictions go. and so it was with his soliloquy on nationalism in houston on monday. and people tend to learn new skills . for most it a language or an instrument or home cooking . for suze it was fishing and tournaments and being a captain of a boat. the personal finance website smartasset recently analyzed the finances for citizens of metro areas in the u.s . to find out how much income they be earning passively through their investments . smartasset used internal revenue service irs data to rank those cities based on how much their citizens earn on four investment types taxable interest dividends qualified dividends and capital gains. for many industry participants the multiple listing services – there be over all locally owned and operated – may be as ripe for disruption as the role of the agent . we be getting closer to a tipping point where the mls be losing relevance daren blomquist said. goldman sachs analyst heath terry pointed out that snap monetizes at the level of facebook inc . fb .  on a per minute basis suggesting considerable room for improvement. first there be a few exceptions not covered above because of the infrequency with which they occur incarceration of the taxpayer restrictions imposed by a foreign country and a return to the taxpayer of the proceeds of a federal tax levy . concerned son related story realtors will soon be free of year old justice department decree so what happens to housing now she said to paula do not miss why the middle aged dad bod could be deadly instead of sexy the question for early retirees is to what am i dedicating my freedom it really not about how many millions you have suze assertion . nor how much play you can do before you get bored and go back to your old job. what could hurt marijuana stocks too much love from investors global automakers the body which represents foreign auto makers in the u.s . warned in june that a imported car could see a price rise of if tariffs on car imports were imposed. being married for years be quite an achievement . i be sorry to hear that it has come to this . or that it might come to this . you be correct . inheritance be not considered marital property in ohio so the only way for it to become part of your community property would be to commingle it in some way . that would in theory include renovations on a home or paying off a mortgage . your husband could still prove that the money came directly from his inheritance assuming he had a good lawyer. talk to the broker . assuming these bonds do not mature in i have also be concerned . even if he invested in these bonds when your mother was i have still be scratching my head over this. read this troubling trend may wreak havoc on the stock market analysts warn wall street has been struggling with signs that weakness in the second largest economy in the globe could fuel disruptions in the rest of the global market . major indexes in asia fell and sent other markets lower after a second day of remarks from chinese officials failed to buttress their troubled equity indexes. showing requests go out to a pool of real estate agents who have agreed to work on a fee for service basis and the first agent to respond gets to do the visit and collect the fee . rex also avoids the mls altogether relying not just on listing aggregators like zillow z .   and trulia but on direct google searches as well. in some of her other recent cases for different employment visas she seen rejections for a computer analyst and a mobile app product manager. how did major benchmarks fare wall street has been struggling with signs that weakness in the second largest economy in the globe could fuel disruptions in the rest of the global market . major indexes in asia fell and sent other markets lower after a second day of remarks from chinese officials failed to buttress their troubled equity indexes. in october alone the phlx semiconductor index sox .  has dropped . leading other indexes in a general market rout attributed to rising interest rates and trade war fears . in comparison the dow jones industrial average djia .  is down . for the month the s p index spx .  is down and the tech heavy nasdaq composite index comp .   be off . . until recently buying by the momo crowd was much stronger than selling by the smart money . in a prior morning capsule we said a big difference from the past be that the momo crowd be not aggressively buying marijuana stocks. read now zillow wo not just show you a home it will sell it to you late tuesday texas instruments inc . txn .  shares dropped in the extended session after the chip maker beat wall street expectations on quarterly earnings but not on revenue but did not when it came to revenue or the fourth quarter outlook . it was the same story for mks instruments inc.mksi . which makes testing equipment for chip makers and healthcare tech companies and shares dropped after hours. in addition some relief may be available when the financial company gives you bad advice regarding a rollover . for instance the day requirement was extended when a bank employee messed up and told a taxpayer that he could not use a rollover because he was over age ½. carreira lawsuit filed sunday in district of columbia federal court said the reasoning was entirely irrational. she thankfully has sufficient funds to support her as my father passed away years ago . now that i have finally started reviewing her portfolio overseen by this one broker i see he started buying very long term corporate bonds some not expiring for another years from now in very large amounts shares to shares . today seemed like a microcosm of october two way volatility sharp moves and acute turns which ultimately left both sides of the tape yearning for more by the close said frank capelleri executive director of equity sales and trading at instinet llc. the big spending on a relatively new advertising medium fits with o’rourke image . he has been described as a fresh face in politics and he has been known to live stream his runs for hamburgers. if the financial institution making the distribution delays providing crucial information required to complete the rollover you may be eligible for a waiver e.g . if you did not receive the appropriate forms in a timely manner . in addition a person can certify their eligibility for a waiver if the financial institution making the distribution does not disclose required information about completing the rollover process. read millennials have more money than you think so expect esg funds in your k meanwhile the move by the saudis to boost output would help ease a fourth quarter supply shortage as u.s . sanctions against iran come into force said analysts at commerzbank. another wall street analyst evercoreisi josh schimmer has noted the large unmet need for non opioid options for pain in osteoarthritis . it possible that the right dose of the drug or the right monitoring could avoid the drug class safety problems he said. one taxpayer took a distribution to purchase her first home . however after the distribution had been taken she got a new job and decided to put the money back into an ira within the day period . the taxpayer filled out the application mailed it to the new company and proceeded to go on vacation for two weeks . upon her return she realized the envelope had been returned due to an incorrect address . the taxpayer immediately contacted her adviser and sent the paperwork to the correct address . however the day rollover period had already lapsed . in this case the irs granted a rollover despite the fact that the day limit had passed because by mailing the application she indicated her intent to preserve the distribution as part of her retirement savings. japan nikkei index nik .  tumbled . and the hong kong hang seng index hsi .  dropped . in line with the retreat in china. u.s . stocks bounced off intraday lows and major indexes trimmed early losses tuesday but the s p still finished lower for a fifth session as a big drop in the chinese market revived fresh questions about the global economy. the stock market opened with a resounding thud on tuesday morning as the dow jones industrial average djia . at one point had shed more than points . the s p index spx .  and the nasdaq composite comp .  endured even harder hits down more than each. do not miss cannabis be now legal in canada but pot companies expect a rocky start. so why did it come out on top the high percentage of retirees who live there likely pushed naples over the edge . some of the population be or older the u.s . census bureau found . florida be one of the five states with the highest median age population along with maine new hampshire vermont and west virginia. the divergence be telling parets explained in his blog post . the last time we saw this was at the market top. marijuana beverages be the new thing but investors should only take sips but plain and simple tesla be destroying the competition it said . it looks like it be the competition that be taking the ambien referring to musk admission that he sometimes uses the sleeping pill. i ran data going back to the s . in years the dow jones industrial average djia .   declined in the six months after halloween on occasions . that nearly one year in three . and it declined by more than on occasions or roughly one time in five . but globally it has worked over time zhang and jacobsen data show. the personal finance website smartasset recently analyzed the finances for citizens of metro areas in the u.s . to find out how much income they be earning passively through their investments . smartasset used internal revenue service irs data to rank those cities based on how much their citizens earn on four investment types taxable interest dividends qualified dividends and capital gains. trump executive order was meant to address concerns over h b visa abuse and keep a tight leash on government agency waivers on buy america policies . carreira be applying for a different type of visa the eb visa her lawyers noted. tilray be the poster boy of short squeeze stock candidates here how to find others he pointed to several divergences that should make clear to investors just how precarious the market situation be at these current levels . the first one be what we be seeing in this chart of the s p vs . the rest of the world. want news about asia delivered to your inbox subscribe to marketwatch free asia daily newsletter . sign up here. a tuesday research report from capital economics said worries about the u.s . economy and to some extent in the past few days china be proving contagious to the broader market. the fischer home was in contract within a month and would have been sooner except that the couple purposely priced the house higher than appraisals had suggested both because they thought they might get lucky in a strong market and because they were in no rush to move. the dow jones industrial average djia . on tuesday ended lower by more than points or . but had been off by as many as points earlier in the session with the nasdaq composite index comp . and the s p index spx . both suffering a bruising opening slide before paring losses ahead of the close. his tweet came as u.s . stocks fell tuesday and with one dow jones industrial average djia .   component caterpillar cat .   saying tariffs on foreign steel and aluminum had made parts for the machinery it manufactures in the u.s . more expensive. do not miss watch out for dead cat bounce in stocks says morgan stanley wilson enjoy coke and the money it might make for marijuana investors now read trade war tracker the new levies imposed and threatened secretary of state mike pompeo said the u.s . be revoking visas for some of the saudi officials responsible for the death of washington post journalist jamal khashoggi at the saudi consulate in istanbul . he did not say how many visas were being revoked as he said the u.s . was looking into using its global magnitsky act powers to sanction them . asked specifically about the role of crown prince mohammed bin salman pompeo replied we be learning the facts. in its tuesday note however citron said that while the media has been focused on elon musk eccentric outlandish and at times offensive behavior it has failed to notice the legitimate disruption of the auto industry that be currently being dominated by tesla using all caps. to be sure not everyone thinks the light at the end of the tunnel be a train. indeed they say someone buying stocks around halloween has typically experienced lower volatility as well as higher returns the holy grail of investing. traders were also awaiting data on u.s . crude supplies . inventories have risen for four straight weeks and were expected to swell further for the week ended oct . . analysts polled by s p global platts expect the energy information administration on wednesday to report a rise of . million barrels for crude stocks . they also expect supply declines of . million barrels for gasoline and . million barrels for distillates. tesla scheduled a post results call with analysts at p.m . pacific about one hour later than usual . ford motor co . be also scheduled to report after the bell on wednesday. credit rating firm fitch forecasts that coffee consumption will rise by . year on year in volume terms in reaching million tonnes globally . the sector has been in a mergers and acquisitions frenzy in recent years as fast moving consumer goods companies rush to gain exposure to the high margin sector. do not miss cannabis be now legal in canada but pot companies expect a rocky start. most planners who be at least moderately successful be comfortable where they are he said . they be using the old top down model of planning for their clients . they be marketing themselves as if managing assets be their primary value . they be still mostly working with clients their age who be all in or approaching retirement . and they be slow to adopt automated asset management technology. on the one hand it hassle to manage this apartment . but it steady income and given the large appreciation in value over the last years it a relatively safe bet . on the other hand you will have to pay capital gains tax when you sell it and you be then faced with an equally perhaps more difficult task . where should you invest this money wisely and safely so you have peace of mind over the next to years you may find yourself back at where you started with a similar rate of return. a few years ago chad torstenson decided to sell his house . his experience he said was fairly typical. a real estate agent came to his home with a contract a photo shoot was done and a sign went up in the front yard. the etfmg alternative harvest etfmj . slumped . paring earlier losses of as much as . but was also headed for a sixth straight loss. on top of that some companies were slated to report earnings including several megacap companies with investors seeking the degree to which higher interest rates be impacting the economy as the federal reserve has indicated it will continue to tighten monetary policy by year end. this became a company called showpal which launched in torstenson home city of des moines just in time for the selling season funded by friends and family . at a time when internet technology the sharing economy and penny pinching households have remade nearly every consumer experience from trading stocks to buying plane tickets showpal and a few other upstarts like it may be the answer to – finally – modernizing the buying and selling of real estate. the good news be you do not need private tutoring to give her that . it could help of course but it may also backfire and present challenges for your daughter to be dropped into a pool of monied peers who talk to each other loudly about their own families extravagant summer vacations and their parent latest model tesla tsla .  there be so many other ways you can allow her to dream without dipping into this honey pot for here and there. the etf down . in afternoon trade with of components losing ground has now lost . during its current losing streak the worst six day stretch since it fell . over the six days ending feb . . the first pointer given in how to potentially become a marijuana millionaire albeit carefully be to expect these stocks to be very volatile . here be the second pointer investors may want to take advantage of the volatility by selling into the strength and buying into the weakness. india globalization capital inc . stockigc . plummeted . it has lost roughly half its value in the past five days and has shed since closing at an eight year high of on oct . . i have been getting a lot of emails from marijuana investors who be trying to understand the real reason behind share prices falling off a cliff . it be never easy for investors when the stocks they be holding fall precipitously. i think it great that there a lot of brain power and innovation directed at the real estate market right now and think this could be a great solution for many sellers . but there be reasons that fsbo has not gained as much traction as some might have expected in the past he said. a united states citizenship and immigration services spokesman said the agency could not comment on pending litigation. ubs analysts ting gao and lei meng in a monday note pointed to remarks by liu shiyu chairman of the china securities regulatory commission who last week pointed to several measures aimed at boosting market confidence including encouraging funds to rescue listed companies with solid outlooks that were facing temporary difficulties due to having pledged shares as collateral. shares of green organic dutchman holdings ltd.tgodf . declined aleafia health inc.aleaf . gave up and aphria inc.aphqf . fell . but this post be not to quibble about whether my frugal lifestyle as failed me which it has not yet in years . this post be to challenge suze experience with retirement and retirement itself. rumors of the tesla killers have been as constant and unfounded as bob lutz call for tesla bankruptcy citron said taking a jab at the former general motors co . gm .  executive and frequent tesla critic. i purchased a duplex years ago and am considering selling it. along with political tensions americans be also anxious about retirement preparedness . millennials for example be worried over their finances and whether they will ever be ready to retirement even if retirement account balances be rising according to a recent fidelity investments analysis of its quarterly data . even near retirees with significant retirement savings about felt behind allianz life insurance of north america found and a majority be concerned they wo not have a comfortable retirement. nobody knows why but a creepily simple way to earn superior long term stock market returns throughout history has been to invest in stocks on all hallow eve oct . each year . two finance professors found this after studying over years worth of stock market data from over one hundred stock markets around the world. dear wife the trump administration trade fights and a so called hard brexit could lift the magnitude of global tariffs to levels last seen roughly years ago according to ubs economists. victor lund be founding partner of wav group consulting and an industry veteran . the mls has big advantages over consumer focused media like zillow lund contends . zillow and sites like it aggregate listings from the mls so in hot markets would be buyers get an advantage by watching the mls for new listings . in fact many local organizations be now pre marketing properties that be coming soon lund said meaning only realtors and their clients get a sneak peek at tomorrow listings. also see my family lost of our income and we have never been happier while the taxpayer funded report devotes many pages to attacking policies few in the u.s . would propose like nationalizing agricultural production it does take on a very real proposal medicare for all. indeed the simple life be one of the lures of early retirement. at a rally in support of former antagonist ted cruz senate re election campaign trump lamented that radical democrats wanted to turn power over to globalists and then sought to set himself apart from those groups who be marked by not caring about our country so much by christening himself a nationalist revealing in his comments an awareness that the term be a historically freighted one that democratic leaders largely eschew the shanghai composite index shcomp .  gave back part of a two day rally falling . on tuesday. you owe your daughter the same privilege . give her the opportunity to make these decisions for herself when she be old enough with your help. whether the recent sharp fall on the market be a buying opportunity or the harbinger of something worse be the multi trillion dollar question . but the professors research be global not merely u.s. based . while u.s . stocks arguably look expensive after a nine year boom international and emerging markets have already come down quite a way. pultegroup inc . phm .  jumped . after reporting a jump in earnings for the third quarter. naples typically does not make it to the top of america richest cities lists but its citizens be above average when it comes to their finances . the median household income there be according to the u.s . census bureau compared to a national average of . that study was a collaboration between the universities of sydney cambridge edinburgh limerick and ulster . it linked mortality records with the results of population based surveys in the u.k . between and in which participants reported their walking pace . average pace walkers aged years or over experienced a reduction in risk of death from cardiovascular causes. daren blomquist who follows real estate business models as lead spokesman for attom data solutions takes a long view of ideas like torstenson’s . fsbo has been in and out of vogue at different cycles he said . it looks like this be taking another run at seeing if fsbo can be more efficient and gain more traction than in the past. according to their analysis of developed and emerging markets average stock market returns for the six months following halloween have worked out at around . a year. third you should strongly consider consulting a financial planner or tax consultant for help with the day extension . they may suggest getting a pricey private letter ruling or asking the irs for equitable relief owing to a failure solely due to the financial organization or asking for irs relief based on something called equity or good conscience . get a daily roundup of the top reads in personal finance delivered to your inbox . subscribe to marketwatch free personal finance daily newsletter . sign up here. but lund thinks that if real estate were ready for disruption it would have been more disrupted by now . the only answer i have be that consumers trust their realtor and everybody has a friend a brother a sister who a realtor lund said . they do not want the headache . they want someone to take care of it for them . of a realtor business comes from a repeat or a referral customer. with her eyes on the winter olympics the ice dancer submitted stacks of paperwork in support of her application including experts from the ice skating and olympic world saying she was truly extraordinary. get a daily roundup of the top reads in personal finance delivered to your inbox . subscribe to marketwatch free personal finance daily newsletter . sign up here. canada traded horizons marijuana life sciences index exchange traded fund hmmj .  plummeted . the largest drop since the fund started trading in april . ask arora nigam arora answers your questions about investing in stocks etfs bonds gold and silver oil and currencies . have a question send it to nigam arora. snap has yet to comment on the memo publicly though so when the company reports third quarter earnings on thursday afternoon it will serve as an opportunity for spiegel to speak to investors about his goals . in addition to striving for profitability snap ceo told employees he wants to devote more attention to messaging functions and look for additional video opportunities. taxpayers can also certify their eligibility for a waiver of the day rule if a family member be ill . in such cases the illness must occur during the day period and prevent the completion of a rollover . in one case a taxpayer withdrew money from several iras to roll it over into one new qualified account . after the distribution the taxpayer spouse suffered a series of medical problems causing the day period to be missed . because the spouse medical issues occurred during the day period and prevented the completion of the rollover the irs granted an extension to the taxpayer. read so remarkably inefficient’ venture capital takes on the housing market related trump major tax promise be a sign that even he recognizes the tax cuts did not resonate with voters with snap snap .  shares off nearly from their march initial public offering price as of tuesday close some be hoping that the beleaguered snapchat parent can pull off a similar transformation. the ubs chart below shows how the u.s . tops the u.k . in the bank analysis of which tariff wall be bigger. elsewhere italy was told to revise its budget by the european commission on tuesday according to news reports as the jostling between the country antiestablishment government and brussels persists. this may sound like a simple recipe for success but it does not come naturally to everyone . trained as technical experts advisers might struggle to listen and probe . some of them prefer to show off their knowledge by constructing portfolios and describing investment products leaving befuddled clients in a daze. european stocks were also lower while the ftse ftse .  fell on questions over brexit and the pace of global growth. an expanded version of this report appears at wsj.com. centene corp . cnc . slid . after the company lowered the high end of its profit guidance. among the more active weed stocks monday aurora cannabis inc.us acbff acb . shed . a day before the vancouver based medical cannabis company stock was slated to begin trading on the new york stock exchange under the ticker symbol acb. harley davidson inc . hog . fell . even after surprising investors with faster international retail sales growth that put third quarter earnings and revenue well beyond analysts estimates . separately the company announced a voluntary recall of motorcycles over a hydraulic clutch assembly. terry sees potential for snap to build a bigger empire with its messaging platform and highlighted the company renewed interest in original video snap recently announced several new short form shows. mclean says even to year notes for a year old woman would take some explanation . twenty year bonds with a client at years old does not seem like a prudent thing to do if the adviser knows the bonds may have to be sold before maturity he adds . with interest rates so low a few years ago and prices only to go down as rates begin to rise selling the bonds could incur some losses . the same be true with bond funds as interest rates rise bond prices go down. when stocks fall staples get a sympathy bid and outperform due to that very same lower beta and their defensive qualities parets said . with new highs in stocks bulls want to see new lows in relative strength for staples . that a normal environment . it when they diverge that it be evidence of something changing. of nearly patients enrolled in the phase trial about . taking tanezumab showed rapidly progressive osteoarthritis which was not observed in patients treated with a placebo . other joint problems also occurred in the two groups treated with tanezumab and higher rates of individuals taking the drug had total joint replacement surgery as compared with the placebo group. of course the residents of these cities who be raking in the mailbox money be doing much better than many americans . despite a seemingly strong economy nearly of adults say their families have had trouble meeting at least one basic need for food health care housing or utilities in the last year according to a report by the urban institute a nonpartisan nonprofit policy group based in washington d.c. european stocks were also lower while the ftse ftse .  fell on questions over brexit and the pace of global growth. recommended my wife and her sister bought a house for their mother then it all went wrong . the retirement plans of most early retirees be not naive fragile castles built on sand . at least the ones i know of be anti fragile multilayered flexible plans built on a combination of investment savings retirement accounts side businesses and backup plans. the horizons marijuana life sciences exchange traded fundhmmj . dropped as much as intraday before paring losses a day after it suffered its biggest ever one day decline . a six session losing streak would be the longest since the seven day stretch ending june . it still not clear what president donald trump mooted tax cut to middle income workers actually entails much less whether it would stand a chance in congress. do not miss my father left his home to his kids my stepmother sold it for million investors will get a clearer indication of how tariffs against chinese goods will affect u.s . chip makers many of whom supply the massive chinese chip market in corporate outlooks when amd reports earnings after the bell on wednesday and intel corp.intc . reports on thursday. for the year the sox index be down compared with a . gain in the dow a . gain in the s p and a . advance in the nasdaq. q. hi dan i have multiple k accounts from various jobs over my career . my current company has a k plan . i participate in the plan and there be a company match . should i roll all my other k plans into my current plan leave them where they be at or move them to an ira or other investment i do not have a lot of time to manage my investments. smart money flows be only mildly negative in aurora cannabis acb . and canopy growth cgc . we saw these divergences lead to collapses in and more recently a severe selloff in parets wrote . you can see that with new highs in the dow this month transports put in a lower high typical behavior at market tops. this idea here be that when either industrial or transportation stocks make new highs it important for the other to follow . when that confirmation does not come there cause for concern. verizon communications inc . vz .  shares gained . after the communications giant beat analysts earnings and sales forecasts. on social media conclusions were reached more readily providing critical information for the u.s . trading day . subscribe to marketwatch free need to know newsletter . sign up here. the irs did not grant a waiver in this case because the taxpayer failed to contact a tax professional to see if he had a firm grasp of the rollover rules and it was always within his control to complete the rollover. the white house report delves into socialism as put into practice in venezuela in maoist china and in the ussr as well as into more successfully implemented socialist concepts in nordic countries including sweden and norway. go through your mother investments one by one and ask him what was your thinking behind this decision bring a third party as a witness if you have to . make up for lost time and open the lines of communication today . allow him to explain each investment before you take any further action . your first priority should be to make the wisest investments possible and plan for your futures . your second priority should be to take any action you deem necessary. see also snap faces major challenge when it comes to replacing imran khan analyst says it may come as no surprise that cities already known for being home to the country wealthiest people came out on top. what extraordinary carreira lawyers say be that her petition was denied . this particular decision it almost breathtaking in its stupidity piston told marketwatch. this can mean time in nature reading meditation and family life . for many who achieve financial independence fi compensatory spending the shopping you do to reward yourself for a tough week at work disappears . for suze it was quitting the qvc habit. do not miss why the middle aged dad bod could be deadly instead of sexy some suggestions do not touch your retirement account out of fear for what will happen in the market but do make sure you be aware of how you be retirement plan be invested and that you be comfortable with it . it does not matter who be in office nolte said . you just have to make sure what your goals be and what risk you can tolerate. patients in the recent trial had previously tried pain medications like opioids and ibuprofen and had not had good enough results according to a release put out by pfizer and eli lilly. peggy in louisiana in other energy trade november gasoline rbx .  fell . to . a gallon the lowest for a front month contract since late february while november heating oil hox .  lost to . a gallon. he muses that few professions exist in which a consumer asks how much the service will cost and the provider responds i be not sure . how much have you got the divergence be telling parets explained in his blog post . the last time we saw this was at the market top. the issue lately be that while there have been pockets of positive action around each day has had its culprits . on monday the financials big drop diluted the market attempt to bounce . on tuesday the s p was able to mount a substantial turn around but this time energy was the obvious laggard he said . so today breach of the lows could end up marking a key trading low but i think the price action shows that the trading environment remains fragile and stocks are easily pushed around. suze orman did a smackdown of the fire financial independence retire early movement on paula pant podcast . she said she hates it hates it hates it. interesting since her publicist asked paula for the interview as well as asking this of other fire podcasters in order to push suze new book products and events . talk about inviting yourself to dinner and then complaining about the food throughout my career i have been labeled as aggressive . at first i thought this was a positive description of my performance . i took it to mean that i was a go getter and that my colleagues and managers appreciated that i had a mind of my own . born and raised in india i grew up surrounded by assertive women whom i viewed as role models . however as time went by it became clear to me that the term aggressive has a negative connotation especially in the u.s. . early retirees be not wild risk takers . they be calculated risk takers . they see the old bargain of a to job until they be as riskier than an early retirement. there be unlimited downside risk in the market right now and i do not think it being respected he wrote . it not until afterwards that they ask what happened ’ when the bottom falls out that when the blaming begins. not everyone does this . many retire backward returning to their old professions after they have filled up on travel or hobbies perhaps on their own terms because that where they felt competent needed and truth be told important . many do a bit of both and feel their way along to who they will be and how they might spend their time in this new world of freedom choices and sovereignty. fraud might be overstating the facts . there be many alternatives to front end loads and mclean says unit investment trusts were likely used to provide your mother with income . he was operating with very little oversight except for the input from your year old mother . any adviser in his position with your mother permission should have at least suggested discussing his plans with the family . it smacks more of inexperience and incompetence than fraud . still follow the paper trail with an accountant if you have to. right now only realtors have access to the mls and many but not all mlss be owned by realtor associations . what more many states have what be called minimum service requirements which sound consumer friendly but tend to preserve the monopoly of the incumbent system in the eyes of observers like harris . as he puts it it an example of states allowing cartels to exist . people should definitely have the right to purchase a la carte services if they want it. receive these updates via email . sign up to get our daily summary of everything president trump did today. sign up here. pultegroup inc . phm .  jumped . after reporting a jump in earnings for the third quarter. have breaking news sent to your inbox . subscribe to marketwatch free bulletin emails . sign up here. please also read and the recent u.s . tariffs along with retaliatory measures be viewed by the swiss bank as the biggest factor in boosting this metric . they be followed by the possible hard brexit which refers to the potential for a sharp break between the u.k . and the european union when the country leaves the trade bloc in march. enjoy coke and the money it might make for marijuana investors but this post be not to quibble about whether my frugal lifestyle as failed me which it has not yet in years . this post be to challenge suze experience with retirement and retirement itself. so maybe this be a good time to buy stocks so long as you spread your bets across say the spdr s p spy . vanguard ftse developed markets vea .   and vanguard ftse emerging markets vwo .   exchange traded funds. disclosure subscribers to the arora report may have positions in the securities mentioned in this article or may take positions at any time . nigam arora be an investor engineer and nuclear physicist by background who has founded two inc . fastest growing companies . he be the founder of the arora report which publishes four newsletters . nigam can be reached at nigam thearorareport.com. overspilled baning baned 
